
1011
7174
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Marvellous Adventures and Rare Conceits
of Master Tyll Owlglass, by Kenneth R. H.  Mackenzie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Marvellous Adventures and Rare Conceits of Master Tyll Owlglass
       Newly collected, chronicled and set forth, in our English tongue

Author: Kenneth R. H.  Mackenzie

Illustrator: Alfred  Crowquill

Release Date: July 3, 2017 [EBook #55035]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARVELLOUS ADVENTURES ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                  THE

                         MARVELLOUS ADVENTURES

                          AND RARE CONCEITS OF

                            MASTER OWLGLASS.


[Illustration: Folly Governeth the World]




                                  THE
                         MARVELLOUS ADVENTURES
                                  AND
                             RARE CONCEITS
                                   OF
                         Master Tyll Owlglass.

  _Newly collected, chronicled and set forth, in our English tongue_,


                      BY KENNETH R. H. MACKENZIE,

                 FELLOW OF THE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES.

      _And Adorned with many most Diverting and Cunning Devices_,

                          BY ALFRED CROWQUILL.

[Illustration]

                                LONDON:
                   TRÜBNER & CO. 60, PATERNOSTER ROW.
                                 1860.




                                LONDON:
                     PRINTED BY WERTHEIMER AND CO.
                     CIRCUS PLACE, FINSBURY CIRCUS.




           AM GANZEN RHEINE AUF UND AB
           DER MENSCHEN GEDÄCHTNISS IST SEIN GRAB.


           WHERE’ER THE WAVE OF RHINE DOTH LAVE.
           MAN’S MEMORY IS STILL HIS GRAVE.

                                         _Fischart_, p. 179.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.


      “Wit, an’t be thy will, put me into good fooling! Those wits
      that think they have thee do very oft prove fools; and I that
      am sure I lack thee, may pass for a wise man: For what says
      Quinapalus? Better a witty fool than a foolish wit.”

                        _Clown in “Twelfth Night,”_ Act I., Scene 5.


Among the folkbooks of the German nation, not one has obtained so
general a circulation as that now presented in an English form. It has
been deemed worthy, as by the Appendix may be perceived, of being
translated into French, Dutch, Danish, Polish, nay, even Hebrew, and
honoured by being reprinted on every kind of paper, good and bad. A
favourite among the young for its amusing and quaint adventures, and a
study among those who strive, by the diligent comparison of different
eras of national literature, to arrive at a due appreciation of national
character, Eulenspiegel, or Owlglass the boor (peasant), possesses a
peculiar value for the old. I well remember how, as a very little child,
I first made the friendship of the lithe though clumsy hero; and to the
present time do not feel that I can say I have lost my interest in the
humourous quips and quiddities of the strolling vagabond. I little
thought, when I then read the German book, that it would be my privilege
to introduce him to other readers in my own language.

The Gil Blas of German mediæval story, there is deep instruction in the
pungent jests and literal ways of the man who held up his mirror for
owls to look in, and each of whose tricks might form the groundwork of a
moral reflection. And for the early times in which it appeared, there
was not a little courage in the author of it. Strange to say, this
person appears to have been a Franciscan friar, Thomas Murner, who, in
other matters, made not a little stir in his own day. He visited this
country, and wrote a book in defence of our good King Hal the Bluff
against that famous monk, Luther; and he received some assistance in a
substantial gift from that monarch. An account of him will be found in
the Appendix; we have here only to deal with the significance of the
book itself.

Like the deep searching work of Rabelais, the book is a satire, not upon
human life only, but upon special and dangerous topics. Very early
editions contain the story of how Eulenspiegel procured an old skull
from a churchyard, and turned the passion for worshipping relics to
profitable account;[1] and the priests and would-be learned men of his
time continually appear in ludicrous, undignified, or humiliating
positions. Rank was not respected, nor was vice in high places passed by
with (so-called) discreet silence. Yet with all the graver objects in
the book, the immediate aim of amusement was never forgotten; and,
letting us into the secrets of peasant life in Germany at an era when
peasants had little to rejoice over, we almost imagine that we can hear
the shouts of laughter with which the blunt outspoken jokes of this sly
clown were received. But Mr. Hallam does justice to a higher
appreciation of this kind of literature among the better classes of the
time.

“They had a literary public, as we may call it,” says this distinguished
writer,[2] “not merely in their courts and universities, but in their
respectable middle class, the burghers of the free cities, and perhaps
in the artizans whom they employed. Their reading was almost always with
a serious end: but no people so successfully cultivated the art of moral
and satirical fable. These in many instances spread with great favour
through Cisalpine Europe. Among the works of this kind, in the fifteenth
century, two deserve mention; the Eulenspiegel, popular afterwards in
England by the name of Howleglass, and a superior and better known
production,[3] the _Narrenschiff_, or Ship of Fools, by Sebastian Brandt
of Strasburg.... It is a metrical satire on the follies of every class,
and may possibly have suggested to Erasmus his _Encomium Moriæ_. But the
idea was not absolutely new; the theatrical company established at Paris
under the name of _Enfans de Sans Souci_, as well as the ancient office
of jester or fool in our courts and castles, implied the same principle
of satirising mankind with ridicule so general, that every man should
feel more pleasure from the humiliation of his neighbours than pain from
his own.... The influence such books of simple fiction and plain moral
would possess over a people, may be judged by the delight they once gave
to children, before we had learnt to vitiate the healthy appetite of
ignorance by premature refinements and stimulating variety.”[4]

Yet with all the repute which the book must have had among the boors and
country louts of what people choose, with doubtful taste or insight, to
call the “dark ages,” Owlglass, if it had not contained within itself
great vitality, might have lain in the obscurity which surrounds many a
contemporary work. Of the three great philosophers then extant, I have
somewhere read a kind of parallel, that Rabelais in his work satirised
fantastically, and with peculiar reference to the more educated and
scholarly readers of his time. Erasmus, on the other part, struck at the
monks with vigorous hand in other fashion; while both Brandt and Murner
took a more popular form in their compositions: yet, while Brandt is now
scarce remembered, Eulenspiegel remains, a striking and applicable book,
setting forth, indeed, in a good light, the truth everywhere, that “the
letter killeth but the spirit giveth life.” In this may be found the
reason of its wonderful popularity in Germany—in this is the secret of
its constant reproduction in so many languages.

The fool in idle hour claims our attentive ear, charms, instructs,
enchains the mind, when the sonorous voice and weighty arguments of the
preacher would have no greater effect than the production of a yawn, or,
at most, a fugitive repentance. The fact of the subjection of the letter
to the spirit must be borne in mind throughout. Mighty times were those
when, by sturdy hands and wise pates, the world was ridding itself of
the rule of monks and literal interpreters of the universe and of the
duties of society. Yet Murner, as has been mentioned, fought against
Luther; nor, indeed, could Rabelais or Erasmus perceive, save somewhat
dimly, whither their words tended. Perhaps, in secret, they saw, in
fitful glimpses, the truth that history proceeds according to
progressive laws of development; and when the monks, who at one time had
done good service, were no longer useful to mankind, they decayed from
inherent fitlessness, and so vanished, overcome by the light of such
lamps as these.

A remarkable feature in the adventures of Owlglass must not be passed
over without notice, viz., the very few allusions anywhere made to the
occult sciences, or to similar subjects. In the story of the invisible
picture there is one slight reference to alchymy; and in that where he
is led forth to the gallows, the multitude regard Owlglass as a
magician, who will rescue himself by the aid of demons. But so real is
the character everywhere, that not even by the many editors has any tale
been introduced connecting the hero with such matters. Yet the absence
of such a colouring displays a greater skill and a deeper purpose in the
author; from the tendency of the age in which it was written, any
mention of occult science would have been excusable, nay, almost
natural. If we remember that the era of its publication was rife with
magicians, astrologers, and alchymists; that Cornelius Agrippa very
shortly afterwards found it necessary to protest against the abuse of
such subjects in his treatise “Of the Uncertainty and Vanity of the
Sciences and Arts,” that Trithemius was then Abbot of the Benedictine
Monastery of Spanheim: all these considerations would have caused no
surprise at the introduction of scenes of enchantment, or, at least, an
employment of them allusively or by implication. But no; true to its
mission of a folk-book, filled with the manners and customs of its time,
Owlglass is thoroughly worldly, and for us, therefore, possesses greater
interest and value.

It may be interesting for a moment to set side by side the jester
exhibited in the pages of Shakspere and the good Master Owlglass.
Historical Owlglass there certainly was at some time of the fourteenth
century, his tomb yet standing at Möllen, as will be seen; but the
pranks of many excellent jesters were all centred in the book telling of
Owlglass; so that he has been overlaid with jokes, not in his own power
to perform. Indeed, in the present edition, from a respect I have for
chronology, I have been obliged to extrude two or three which would have
involved anachronisms. However, they were somewhat dull, and therefore
need not be regretted.

The first English version of Owlglass (as to which see the Appendix, p.
220) having been published early in the sixteenth century, in a “little
dumpy quarto,” by Master William Copland, its fame might, without much
difficulty, have infiltrated the country parts of England; and, if we
regard the clowns of Shakspere, Touchstone, in “As You Like It,” for
example, it might appear that Shakspere had seen this Black Letter of
William Copland: yet, while the humour of Owlglass consists in his
stolid performance of the exact words commanded him, there is clearly a
quite other appreciation of wit in the English writer. It is, in fact,
the polished foil beside the homely cudgel—both effective weapons, but
one of them far more glittering, swift, and murderous. The cudgel may be
warded off by a less skilful hand, the glancing steel hath made a wound,
and been withdrawn in the very flash of its own rapidity. Dogberry and
Verges, Costard perhaps, nay, even Sir Toby Belch, have points of
character more resembling Owlglass than do the clowns of our great poet.
The Fool in King Lear, has some kin to him, but is infinitely wiser.
Indeed, we might perhaps rather class Bardolph, Pistol, and Nym,
humourists in their way, with Master Owlglass than the subtle wits
Shakspere brings upon the stage. Yet has Owlglass an existence beyond
and outside all question of contrast, all opinion of similarity.
Gervinus, in his comprehensive History of German Fiction[5] has well
defined Owlglass to be “the personified quip and crank” (_der
personificirte Schwank_). In fact, he is a Gothic Diogenes set in a
Teutonic frame, living, moving, and having his being in an atmosphere as
peculiarly distinct in its grotesque and massive proportions, as was the
earlier Hellenic age, in its union of elegance and power. No previous
time could have produced such an out-birth, and, with all our modern
tendencies towards humour, fostered by the constant study of our
quainter dramatists, another Owlglass would be a distortion, if not an
impossibility.

That, even in grave England, and with quaint Ben Jonson, Master Owlglass
was a favourite, we may see from two allusions which he makes to him;
one in the “Poetaster,” Act the Third, Scene the Fourth, where Tucca
exclaims: “What, do you laugh, Owlglass?” And again in the “Masque of
the Fortunate Isles,” produced in 1626, Ben Jonson introduces
Howleglass; and Johphiel says to Merefool:—

           Or what do you think
           Of Howleglass instead of him?

           _Merefool._—No him
           I have a mind to.

           _Johphiel._—O, but Ulen-spiegle,
           Were such a name—but you shall have your longing.

And later on, the remark is made:—

               Whether you would present him with an Hermes
             Or with an Howleglass?

             _Skelton._—An Howleglass
             To come to pass
             On his father’s ass;
             There never was,
             By day, nor night,
             A finer sight,
             With feathers upright
             In his horned cap,
             And crooked shape,
             Much like an ape,
             With owl on fist.
             And glass at his wrist.[6]

A most unjustifiable libel, by the way, is committed here, for Owlglass
was always a “proper” gentleman, having no crook-back or ape-like
appearance.[7]

One of the most thoughtful and philosophic writers of our day, Mr.
Carlyle, has a few noteworthy sentences regarding this strange book,
which we shall do well to transfer to these pages:—

“Lastly, in a third class, we find in full play that spirit of broad
drollery, of rough saturnine humour, which the Germans claim as a
special characteristic; among these, we must not omit to mention the
_Schiltbürger_ correspondent to our own _Wise Men of Gotham_; still less
the far-famed _Tyll Eulenspiegel_ (Tyll Owlglass), whose rogueries and
waggeries belong in the fullest sense to this era.

“This last is a true German work; for both the man, Tyll Eulenspiegel,
and the book which is his history, were produced there. Nevertheless,
Tyll’s fame has gone abroad into all lands; thus, the narrative of his
exploits has been published in innumerable editions, even with all
manner of learned glosses, and translated into Latin, English, French,
Dutch, Polish; nay, in several languages, as in his own, an
_Eulenspiegelerei_ and _Espiéglerie_, or dog’s trick, so named after
him, still by consent of lexicographers, keeps his memory alive. We may
say, that to few mortals has it been granted to earn such a place in
universal history as Tyll; for now, after five centuries, when Wallace’s
birth-place is unknown even to the Scots; and the admirable Crichton
still more rapidly is grown a shadow; and Edward Longshanks sleeps
unregarded save by a few antiquarian English, Tyll’s native village is
pointed out with pride to the traveller, and his tombstone, with a
sculptured pun on his name,—namely, an Owl and a Glass,—still stands, or
pretends to stand, at Möllen, near Lübeck, where, since 1350, his once
nimble bones have been at rest. Tyll, in the calling he had chosen,
naturally led a wandering life, as place after place became too hot for
him; by which means he saw into many things with his own eyes; having
been not only over all Westphalia and Saxony, but even in Poland, and as
far as Rome. That in his old days, like other great men, he became an
autobiographer, and in trustful winter evenings, not on paper, but on
air, and to the laughter-lovers of Möllen, composed this work himself,
is purely a hypothesis; certain only that it came forth originally in
the dialect of this region, namely, the _Platt-Deutsch_; and was
therefrom translated, probably about a century afterwards, into its
present High German, as Lessing conjectures, by one Thomas Murner, who,
on other grounds, is not unknown to antiquaries. For the rest, write it
who might, the book is here, ‘abounding,’ as a wise critic remarks, ‘in
inventive humour, in rough merriment, and broad drollery, not without a
keen rugged shrewdness of insight; which properties must have made it
irresistibly captivating to the popular sense; and with all its
fantastic extravagancies, and roguish crotchets, in many points
instructive.’”[8]

Mr. Carlyle then cites one adventure, that of the Easter Play, which has
not been included in the present version; for although it illustrates
well enough the interior of a parson’s household of the fourteenth
century, there is a smack of profanity about it which it is well to
avoid. And, indeed, it is due to the reader of this volume, to inform
him, that our present chronicle differs in one material point from all
former editions. While it has been my object everywhere to tell the
story of Owlglass in a quaint and simple manner, modern good taste
required a special duty at the chronicler’s hands: viz., that of
purification and modification, for it may readily be believed that a
book written _of_ the fourteenth century, _for_ the sixteenth century,
would abound with homely wit, not quite consonant with the ideas of the
nineteenth. Therefore several stories of a somewhat indelicate, and
generally pointless, character have been omitted, and their place
supplied with matter obtained by a collation of several editions in the
German, French, and Flemish languages.

And another aim which I have had in view has been, where good taste and
opportunity admitted, to apply, in a veiled manner, the axioms and quips
of our knight-errant of roguery, to subjects and follies not banished
from our own more polite age. The reader will thus be able to judge in
how far this modern Owlglass differs from its predecessors. In no
instance, however, have I permitted myself to lose sight of the object
in view, which was to give as good a picture of the original as might
be, and that in spirit rather than in letter. This spirit has been so
justly estimated by M. Robin, a clever and dashing French critic, whose
sad death may still be remembered by a few, that, at the risk of adding
too much to this preface, I subjoin an epitome of his remarks:—

“It is quite true,” says he, “that glory is nothing but vanity. I have
seen in the sepulchral silence of libraries, names quite unknown, on the
backs of gigantic volumes, the librarians could tell me nothing of
these, except that they were the authors of these books. I have seen, on
the pavement of ancient churches, pompous epitaphs, and heraldic arms,
and the nails of the peasant’s shoe tread them under foot. Be then in
life a man of learning, knowing every language, be a noble of Spain, a
Knight of the Golden Fleece, Viceroy of Mexico or Peru, say you have the
right of keeping your hat on in the presence of the King, yet it will
scarcely be known that you have lived, while a _vaurien_, a man who had
neither hearth nor home, a practical joker, a drunkard, having the devil
in his purse, living from hand to mouth, sleeping to-day in the streets,
and to-morrow in the bed of his host, whom he never pays, and
understanding too well the buffoonery of life ever to have thought of
glory; as soon as this man is dead, and ignobly buried, he enters at
once into immortality, bequeathing to the people a name which they will
never forget, and, to the Attic language of the moderns, a word of which
they stood much in need. Who can boast of having invented a word? Very
few of the greatest writers can arrogate to themselves this most rare
glory. But to leave one’s name to the most grave and self-sufficient
language in Europe, to force it to say _espiègle_, because one’s name
was Ulenspiegel; and to pass fifty years in practical joking and
laughter; to be able to call oneself the father of the great family of
Mystificators, surely this is no common fate, and doubtless the
contemplator of it will cry out: ‘Where doth Immortality dwell? Poor
author, it was well worth thy pains to wear out thy brain in writing
folios! Unfortunate hidalgo, it was well worth the trouble of being
puffed up with pride at a long name unpronounceable in a breath, that
this name should be forgotten, and that the name of a boorish jester
should be transmitted almost intact to the most distant posterity.”

The best test of the worth of a book, whether it be several centuries
old, or, as it were, a production of our own day, is the proportion of
times that it has been reproduced or imitated. Singularly enough, while,
in most continental languages, such translations and imitations have
been frequent, in two instances only has this celebrated folk-book
appeared in an English dress; first, as has been already stated, in
Black Letter, in 1528–1530, and again in a modified form in 1720. With a
description of these two editions I will not trouble the reader here, as
in the Appendix at the end an accurate account of them will be found;
and I will merely add, in this place, that of the Black Letter
translation only two copies are known to exist, both in the British
Museum; and that of the second, a copy of which is now in my own
possession, I have only been able to find one other, which is in the
Douce Collection in the Bodleian.

It was originally in contemplation to reprint the scarce Black Letter
edition; but, on a careful examination, I found this an impossibility,
as the contents, for reasons already hinted at, would have shocked good
taste; nor, in point of fact, would that edition have offered so great a
variety as in this volume has been presented; which may be understood
when it is explained, that of all kinds of stories, good and bad, the
Black Letter gives but forty-eight; while in the present chronicle there
are—such questionable adventures being omitted—no less than one hundred
and eleven. Although the idea of such reprint was thus abandoned, there
appeared no reason, however, why the old-fashioned form should not be
adopted in the telling of the tale. For this and any other faults which
the reader may detect I hold myself responsible; and I may mention, that
so careful have I been to imitate the style of the time in which it is
supposed to be written, that I have even followed the confusion between
the use of the “thee” and “thou” and “you” and “ye” common in early
books, especially at the transition era of the Stuarts.

The edition which I have adopted as a guide or clue-line, is the Low
German original of 1519 in the excellent and exhaustive work of Dr.
Lappenberg; and I need not here especially refer to any other, save that
of M. Octave Delepierre, long time a zealous antiquary, who argues for a
Flemish origin for our hero, an origin in which, giving every meed of
praise to that gentleman for the singular ingenuity and complete
localization which his book exhibits, I need scarcely say that I cannot
coincide. Nay, it may even be suspected that he himself is but in jest
with his argument.

I have also to draw the notice of the reader to the Appendices at the
end of this volume, which enter into the bibliographical and other
history of the book, and to mention that I am greatly indebted to the
Rev. Dr. Bandinel, the venerable Librarian of the Bodleian Library at
Oxford, and also to my friends, the Rev. Alfred Hackman, M.A., Precentor
of Christ Church, and the Rev. John S. Sidebotham, M.A., Chaplain of New
College, and Preacher at St. Martin’s, Carfax, Oxford, for much valuable
assistance in searching for Eulenspiegel literature amidst the treasures
contained in that valuable library.

This is all, I think, which need here be said touching the task I have
here completed; for the reader need not be asked to appreciate the
artistic skill of my friend and coadjutor, Mr. Alfred Crowquill. If the
reader does but experience in the perusal of this singular
book—practically the first English edition of it—one tithe of the
pleasure I have had in preparing it, all that was to be accomplished
will have been duly fulfilled.

                                     KENNETH ROBERT HENDERSON MACKENZIE.

 35, Bernard Street, Russell Square, W.C.
             _October 3, 1859._

-----

Footnote 1:

  See Adventure the 36th, p. 63.

Footnote 2:

  Introduction to the Literature of Europe, vol. i. p. 235 (Library
  ed.); vol. i. p. 240 (Cabinet ed.).

Footnote 3:

  Matter of doubt to the present writer whether it be thus superior; in
  any case, it would be scarcely so interesting to people now-a-days.
  But see the Appendix.

Footnote 4:

  Bouterwek, in his “History of German Poetry and Eloquence”
  (_Geschichte der deutschen Poesie und Beredsamkeit_), vol. ix. p. 336,
  confirms the observations of Hallam, and lends additional testimony to
  the popularity of the Eulenspiegel. Adolf Rosen von Kreutzheim, in the
  Preface to his poem, the _Esel-König_ (Ass-King), alludes to the
  general dispersion of Eulenspiegel, Marcolphus, Katziporo, and other
  works, and abuses them in set terms as shameful, mischievous, and
  dangerous.

Footnote 5:

  History of German Fiction, vol. ii. p. 298.

Footnote 6:

  Jonson’s Works, p. 650.

Footnote 7:

  An Howleglass is mentioned as being in the library of a Captain Cox.
  On which, see the Appendix, p. 221.

Footnote 8:

  Carlyle, Miscellaneous Essays, Edition 1857, Vol. II. pp. 287–288.




                               CONTENTS.


 PREFACE.

                                                                    PAGE

 THE INTRODUCTION TOUCHING MASTER TYLL OWLGLASS                        1


                               Adventures.

 I.—How Tyll Owlglass was born, and was on one day three times
 christened                                                            2

 II.—How that Owlglass when that he was a child did give a
 marvellous answer to a man that asked the way                         3

 III.—How all the boors did cry out shame upon Owlglass for his
 knavery; and how he rode upon a horse behind his father               5

 IV.—How Owlglass did learn to dance upon a rope, and did fall
 therefrom into the River Saale                                        6

 V.—How Owlglass did move two hundred young people, that they did
 give unto him their shoes, with the which he made rare sport upon
 his rope                                                              8

 VI.—How that Owlglass his mother did move him that he should learn
 a handicraft                                                          9

 VII.—How Owlglass did deceive a baker at Strasfurt, and gat bread
 for his mother                                                       10

 VIII.—How Owlglass, with other children, was forced to eat fat
 soup, and gat blows likewise                                         11

 IX.—How Owlglass brought it about that the stingy farmer’s poultry
 drew for baits                                                       12

 X.—How Owlglass was again moved of his mother to depart to a
 foreign land, that he might learn a handicraft                       13

 XI.—How Owlglass crept into a bee-hive; how two thieves came by
 night to steal honey; what honey they did steal; and how Owlglass
 made it come to pass, that the thieves did fight one with the
 other, and did leave the bee-hive standing                           14

 XII.—How Owlglass for little money did have a singing bird for his
 dinner                                                               16

 XIII.—How Owlglass did eat the roasted chicken from off the spit     17

 XIV.—How Owlglass did publish abroad that he would fly from off
 the roof of the town-house at Magdeburg                              19

 XV.—How Owlglass did cure the sick folks in the hospital at
 Nürnberg in one day, and what came thereafter                        21

 XVI.—How Owlglass bought bread according to the proverb, “To him
 that hath bread is bread given”                                      23

 XVII.—How Owlglass became a doctor, and did cure many folk           23

 XVIII.—How that Owlglass became a drawer of teeth, and cured all
 by a wondrous pill                                                   25

 XIX.—How that Owlglass did at Brunswick hire him to a baker, and
 did there bake owls and monkeys                                      26

 XX.—How Owlglass did again hire him unto a baker, and how he
 bolted meal in the moon’s light                                      29

 XXI.—Telleth of what manner of thinking was Owlglass, and how he
 formed his life according unto principles of virtue and goodness     32

 XXII.—How that Owlglass did hire him to the Count of Anhalt to
 blow the horn on a tower; and when that enemies did approach, then
 blew he not, and when that they came not, then blew he               33

 XXIII.—How that Owlglass did have golden shoes struck unto his
 horse’s feet                                                         37

 XXIV.—How that Owlglass did have a great contention before the
 King of Poland with two other fools                                  38

 XXV.—How that Owlglass did make confession to a priest, and took
 from him a silver box                                                39

 XXVI.—How that Owlglass was forbidden the dukedom of Lunenburg,
 and how he did cut open his horse and stand therein                  40

 XXVII.—How that Owlglass did buy an inheritance in land from a
 boor, and how he sate therein in a cart                              42

 XXVIII.—How that Owlglass painted the forbears of the Landgrave of
 Hessen, and told him that an if he were ignobly born, he might not
 behold his painting                                                  43

 XXIX.—How that Owlglass was for little money well entertained of
 two innkeepers                                                       49

 XXX.—How that Owlglass did tell his master how he might ’scape
 giving pork unto his neighbours                                      51

 XXXI.—How that Owlglass conferred with the rector and masters of
 the University of Prague in Bohemia, and how he did make answer
 unto their questions, and therein came off most wisely               52

 XXXII.—How that Owlglass did on a time mix him up in a marriage
 strife, and did soon end it with great renown                        54

 XXXIII.—How that Owlglass did cause an ass to read certain words
 out of a book at the great university of Erfurt                      55

 XXXIV.—How that Owlglass did kill a hog, and answered for his evil
 doings unto the burghmaster                                          58

 XXXV.—How that Owlglass at Nugenstädten, in the land of Thuringia,
 did wash the women’s furs                                            61

 XXXVI.—Telleth how that Owlglass journeyed about the land with a
 saint’s head, and did beguile many therewith                         63

 XXXVII.—How that Owlglass did make the town-watch of Nürnberg to
 fall into the water which is called the Pegnitz                      65

 XXXVIII.—How that Owlglass did at Bamberg eat for money              67

 XXXIX.—How that Owlglass did make a wager with a Jew about a
 horse, and did deceive him                                           68

 XL.—How that Owlglass did have much money for an old hat             70

 XLI.—How that Owlglass journeyed unto Rome to see the Pope, and
 how his Holiness considered that Owlglass was a heretic              72

 XLII.—How that Owlglass without money bought poultry at
 Quedlingburg, and for security gave unto the farmer’s wife the
 cock                                                                 75

 XLIII.—How that Owlglass, with a knavish confession, did beguile
 the priest of Riesenburg of his horse                                76

 XLIV.—How that Owlglass did hire him to a smith, and what he did
 while with him                                                       80

 XLV.—How that Owlglass did cause all the tools, hammers, and tongs
 of a smith to be as one mass of iron                                 83

 XLVI.—How that Owlglass did speak a word of truth unto a smith,
 his wife, man, and maid, each one before the house                   85

 XLVII.—How that Owlglass, at Frankfort-on-the-Main, did with guile
 delude two Jews of rings                                             87

 XLVIII.—How that Owlglass served a shoemaker, and how that he
 inquired of him what shapes he should cut; and the master answered
 him, and said: “Great and small, as the herdsman driveth forth to
 field.” Therefore cut he oxen, cows, calves, sheep and pigs          88

 XLIX.—How that Owlglass bought eggs and had them tightly packed      90

 L.—How that Owlglass made a soup for a boor, and put therein
 shoemaker’s oil; for that, in his nobility, he thought it good
 enow for the boor                                                    91

 LI.—This chapter is a special chapter, telling how that a
 bootmaker sought to beguile Owlglass by greasing his boots, and
 how that Owlglass looked through the window, and brake it            93

 LII.—Telleth how that Owlglass at Einbeck became a brewer’s man,
 and did seethe a dog which was called Hops                           95

 LIII.—How that Owlglass hired him to a tailor, and sewed so
 secretly that it was not seen of any one                             97

 LIV.—How that Owlglass caused three tailors to fall from their
 board, and then would have persuaded the people that the wind had
 blown them down                                                      99

 LV.—How that Owlglass assembled all the tailors throughout the
 whole land of Saxony, by proclaiming that he would teach them a
 mighty useful thing, that would get bread both for them and their
 children                                                            101

 LVI.—How that Owlglass beat wool upon a saint’s day, and that very
 high                                                                103

 LVII.—How that Owlglass was hired by a furrier, and did sleep
 among the skins                                                     105

 LVIII.—How that Owlglass on a time at Berlin did make wolves        107

 LIX.—How that Owlglass, being servant to a great lord, did fetch
 for him wine and beer together in a most delectable manner          109

 LX.—How that Owlglass for a tanner prepared leather with stools
 and benches, at the good city of Brunswick on the Dam               111

 LXI.—How that Owlglass was groom unto a noble lord, and what
 knavery he wrought unto his lord’s horse Rosamond                   112

 LXII.—How that Owlglass beguiled the drawer at the town-house
 cellar of Lübeck, and did for a can of wine give him a can of
 water                                                               114

 LXIII.—How that Owlglass ’scaped hanging by his cunning, and would
 have hanged himself for a crown, yet did not                        116

 LXIV.—How that Owlglass, at Helmstadt, caused a great pocket to be
 made                                                                119

 LXV.—How that Owlglass, at Erfurt, beguiled a butcher               120

 LXVI.—Telleth how that good Master Owlglass again beguiled the
 butcher at Erfurt, by pleasing him with a most grateful jingle      122

 LXVII.—Touching the faults of the which our noble Master Owlglass
 had a few; for he was human, and in all human things is
 imperfection                                                        123

 LXVIII.—How that Owlglass, at Dresden, became a carpenter, and for
 his pains earned little thanks                                      125

 LXIX.—How that Owlglass did hire himself unto the master of a
 saw-mill                                                            127

 LXX.—How that Owlglass became a maker of spectacles, and perceived
 that trade was very bad                                             129

 LXXI.—How that Owlglass of a boor at the fair of Gerau took
 leather                                                             132

 LXXII.—How that at Hildesheim Owlglass did hire himself unto a
 merchant, to be his cook, and what tricks he played unto him        133

 LXXIII.—How that at Greifswald good Master Owlglass came unto the
 Rector of the University, and proclaimed himself to be a master in
 all languages, save in one only, to wit, the Spanish tongue         140

 LXXIV.—How that Owlglass did, at Wismar, become a horse-dealer,
 and beguiled a merchant                                             143

 LXXV.—How that Owlglass wrought a great knavery upon a pipemaker,
 at Lüneburg                                                         145

 LXXVI.—How that an old woman mocked the good Master Owlglass when
 that at Gerdau he lost his pocket                                   148

 LXXVII.—How that Owlglass gained money by a horse                   152

 LXXVIII.—How that, at Oltzen, Owlglass did beguile a boor of a
 piece of green cloth, and caused him to confess that it was blue    153

 LXXIX.—How that Owlglass most strangely gat a potful of money       157

 LXXX.—How that Owlglass ran great peril of his neck for receiving
 the pot of money, yet gat fifteen shillings instead of a hanging    160

 LXXXI.—How that Owlglass told many that he had lost his
 money-girdle, and thereby came with good luck unto a warm fire      162

 LXXXII.—How that Owlglass did at Bremen of the market-women buy
 milk, and cause it to be poured altogether into one tun             163

 LXXXIII.—How that Owlglass spake unto twelve blind men, and
 persuaded them that he had unto them given twelve shillings, and
 how that they spent the money and came evilly off thereafter        164

 LXXXIV.—How that in a city of Saxony Owlglass sowed knaves          169

 LXXXV.—How that in the good city of Hamburg, Owlglass hired him
 unto a barber, and went through the casement unto his service       173

 LXXXVI.—How that Owlglass did cause the host of the inn at
 Eisleben to be beset with great terror, by showing unto him a
 wolf, of the which he professed no fear                             175

 LXXXVII.—How that Owlglass paid his host with the ring of his
 money                                                               180

 LXXXVIII.—How that Owlglass, at Lübeck, did escape from a house,
 when that the watch would have taken him for his debts              181

 LXXXIX.—How that Owlglass, at Stassfurt, of a dog took the skin,
 the which he gave unto his hostess for her charges                  182

 XC.—How that our noble master gave assurance unto the same
 hostess, that Owlglass lay upon the wheel                           184

 XCI.—How that Owlglass caused a Hollander from a plate to take an
 apple, the which evilly ended for the eater                         185

 XCII.—How that Owlglass caused a woman to break in pieces the
 whole of her wares, in the market-place at Bremen                   187

 XCIII.—How that Owlglass sold a horse, the which would not go over
 trees                                                               191

 XCIV.—How that of a horse-dealer Owlglass bought a horse and only
 paid half of the money therefor                                     192

 XCV.—How that in the land of Brunswick Owlglass turned shepherd     193

 XCVI.—How that without money Owlglass bought a pair of shoes        195

 XCVII.—How that Owlglass sold unto the furriers, at Leipzig, a
 live cat, the which was sewed into the skin of a hare; and how
 rare sport came thereof                                             196

 XCVIII.—How that Owlglass hired himself unto a boor                 197

 XCIX.—How that Owlglass gat him to the High School at Paris         199

 C.—How Owlglass would fain have been an innkeeper at Rouen, but
 was beguiled by a one-eyed man, and again, in turn, cozened him     199

 CI.—How, in Berlin, Owlglass was an officer, and collected taxes
 of the boors                                                        201

 CII.—How that in his latter days Owlglass became a pious monk, and
 what came thereof                                                   203

 CIII.—How that when at Möllen Owlglass lay sick, his mother came
 unto him                                                            206

 CIV.—How that when Owlglass was sick unto death, he made
 confession of three things, the which it sorely troubled him he
 had not done                                                        207

 CV.—Saith, how that to a greedy priest Owlglass confessed his
 sins, and paid him handsomely for his pains                         209

 CVI.—How that Owlglass in three parts did divide all that belonged
 unto him; and the one part gave he freely unto his friends, and
 another thereof humbly to the town council of Möllen, and the
 third part unto the priest there                                    211

 CVII.—How that at Möllen Owlglass died, and the swine did cast
 down the coffin when that the good priests sang the vigil           212

 CVIII.—How that our for ever prized Master Owlglass was buried      213

 CIX.—Telleth what stood upon his gravestone                         214

 CX.—How in after time our most excellent Owlglass was esteemed so
 worthy that he was made a holy Saint; and on the day of All Fools
 in April do the folk alway keep his memory, as also when they do a
 foolish thing, the which maketh him continually esteemed of great
 and small                                                           215

 CXI.—Reciteth a few grave reflections of this present chronicler    216


                               APPENDICES.

 APPENDIX A.

 Bibliographical Notes for the Literary History of Eulenspiegel      219


 APPENDIX B.

 The Historical Eulenspiegel and his Gravestone                      240


 APPENDIX C.

 Of Dr. Thomas Murner, the Author of Eulenspiegel                    244


 APPENDIX D.

 The Verses inserted by William Copland in the English black-letter
   Howleglas of 1528                                                 247


 APPENDIX E.

 The Bakâla Legend of the Valacqs analogous to Owlglass              249


 APPENDIX F.

 Works akin to the Eulenspiegel Literature                           252

[Illustration]




                             ILLUSTRATIONS.


 Cup and Ball (Frontispiece)

 Vignette Owlglass (Title)

                                                                    PAGE

 Tyll Owlglass                                                         1

 Child Owlglass                                                        4

 Beehive borne, _coloured_                                            15

 Doctor Owlglass, _coloured_                                          23

 Hot Water Cure                                                       24

 Wisdom and Impudence                                                 27

 Watchman Owlglass                                                    34

 Painter Owlglass                                                     46

 Respected Reader                                                     56

 Furrier Owlglass                                                     61

 Poulterer Owlglass, _coloured_                                       75

 Blacksmith Owlglass                                                  81

 Brewer Owlglass, _coloured_                                          96

 Ware Wolf!                                                          107

 Nimble Owlglass                                                     116

 Provident Owlglass                                                  121

 Sawyer Owlglass                                                     127

 Optical Owlglass                                                    129

 Nothing like Leather!                                               132

 A Pleasant Sight                                                    137

 Horse-dealer Owlglass                                               144

 A Young Bride                                                       151

 A Genial Fellow                                                     175

 A Fat Friend                                                        186

 Unhorsed                                                            191

 Shepherd Owlglass                                                   194

 Owlglass selleth Puss, _coloured_                                   196

 Monk Owlglass                                                       203

 Dip not too deep! _coloured_                                        208

 The Device of the Owl and Glass                                     214

 Put out the Light!                                                  217

 The Gravestone                                                      240

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  THE

                       MERRY ADVENTURES AND JESTS

                                   OF

                            MASTER OWLGLASS.




            The Introduction touching Master Tyll Owlglass.


With what joy and inward content do I not greet ye, my masters, bringing
with me for your sweet delectation and delightful comfort the history,
the which I have most diligently written, and out of many learned and
wise books gathered together, and which indeed telleth of the merry
jests, rare conceits, and subtile cony-catching of that renowned Master
Tyll Owlglass, who in the Brunswick land was born. And i’ faith, ye do
owe me not a little grace and thankfulness for that which I have now
finished,—but an if my pains had been a thousandfold greater than they
have been, I would not have spared myself. This is mine answer unto ye.
And my desire hath been, that ye shall most merrily sit ye round the
fire and laugh until that your sides shall ache, and your inner man be
shaken with the continual reverberation of your delighted spirit. For an
ill heart is such an one that doth never rejoice, but trembleth ever and
anon at the wonders with the which we be encompassed, so do ye now,
without any other speech from me, accept this little book, and therein
read, and ponder well the deeds of this noble master, who from low
estate and boorish condition rose to be the companion of princes and
dukes, and, by his infinitude of rare parts, remaineth well known and
beloved of all men in divers countries and lands all over the fair
domain of Christendom. And now do I bid ye farewell, and leave ye with a
companion less tedious than am I, and in the reading of his life will ye
not lose your labour, that know I well.




                          The First Adventure.

_How Tyll Owlglass was born and was in one day three times christened._


As verily all creatures must have a beginning of their lives, so that
they may come into this world to abide therein, so also must it be with
the famous Master Owlglass, who lived in Germany many years, and of whom
many notable adventures are told and noised about all over that country.
In the land of Brunswick, in the deep wood named Melme, lieth a village
named Kneitlingen, and there was born the pious child Owlglass. And the
name of his father was Nicolaus, commonly said Claus, Owlglass, and his
mother’s name was Anna Wertbeck. It fortuned, that when the child was
born that they made a great feast, and sent the child to be christened
in the village of Amptlen; hard by the castle of Amptlen, which was
after destroyed by the people of Magdeburg. And when the child was
baptised, he was called Tyll Owlglass. Truly, however, after that the
feast had come to an end, the godfathers and godmothers of the child
having eaten and drunken right lustily (for it was the custom of that
place most heartily to do these things), set forth on their way
homeward, and the sun being hot, they were tired and they minded not
their steps to be careful of them, and so it came to pass, that one of
them carrying the child caught her foot upon a stone and fell into a
ditch, so child and all were quickly covered with mud. But as weeds
cannot so easily come to harm, the child was not hurt, but only thus
christened in the mire.

When they got home, the child was washed clean in hot water. Thus was
Owlglass in one day three times christened, first in the church, then in
the mud of the ditch, and at last in warm water. So is it always shown
with great and famous persons, that, in their infancy, strange and most
wonderful things do foreshow their future greatness.




                         The Second Adventure.

_How that Owlglass when that he was a child did give a marvellous answer
                     to a man that asked the way._


[Illustration]

Upon a time went the father and mother of Owlglass forth, and left
Owlglass within the house. Then came a man riding by, and he rode his
horse half into the house in the doorway, and asked: “Is there nobody
within?” Then answered the child: “Yea, there is a man and a half, and
the head of a horse.” Then asked the man: “Where is thy father?” and the
child made answer and said: “My father is of ill making worse; and my
mother is gone for scathe or shame.” And the man said to the child: “How
understandest thou that?” And then the child said: “My father is making
of ill worse, for he plougheth the field and maketh great holes, that
men should fall therein when they ride. And my mother is gone to borrow
bread, and when she giveth it again and giveth less it is a shame, and
when she giveth it and giveth more it is scathe.” Then said the man:
“Which is the way to ride?” And the child answered and said: “There
where the geese go.” And then rode the man his way to the geese, and
when he came to the geese they flew into the water; then wist he not
whither to ride, but turned again to the child and said: “The geese be
flown into the water, and thus wot I not what to do nor whither to
ride.” Then answered the child: “Ye must ride where the geese go and not
where they swim.” Then departed the man and rode his way, and marvelled
of the answer of the child. Thus from the mouths of babes cometh forth
wisdom and ready conceit.




                          The Third Adventure.

_How all the boors did cry out shame upon Owlglass for his knavery; and
              how he rode upon a horse behind his father._


Now when Owlglass had come to an age to run about, he began playing
divers tricks and knavish actions among the boys of his village; and he
fought and tumbled about upon the grass, that he looked more like a
monkey than a boy. But when it came to pass that he was four years old,
his malice waxed greater and greater, so that his father was ever being
disputed with by the neighbours, who cried out shame upon Owlglass, as
being so great a knave; and though it happened that his father did scold
him with many words, Owlglass did always excuse himself by knavish
answers. Thereat the father thought he would quickly learn the verity of
these sayings of the neighbours, and at a time when the boors were all
walking in the streets, he did set his son Owlglass behind him on his
horse. Then, also, he commanded Owlglass that he should be most quiet
and silent. What, then, did the pious and good child? He did silently
play tricks and mocked the people, whereon they did most loudly cry out
upon Owlglass: “Fie upon the little malicious knave!”

Now as Owlglass spake never a word in all this time, his father did not
know how it came to pass that the people did cry out so loudly; and
Owlglass complained to him, and said: “Hearest thou, father! Here sit I
silently behind thee upon thy horse and say no word, and yet the people
cry out against me for my knavery.” Then the father sayeth but little,
and taketh Owlglass and setteth him upon the horse in front of him. Then
did Owlglass open his mouth wide, and did stretch forth his tongue, in
mockery of the people. And the people did run forth, crying: “Out upon
the little knave!” Yet did not the father see the knavery, but said:
“Alas for thee, that thou shouldst have been born in an unhappy hour!”
So much did he love Owlglass, that he then departed out of the land of
Brunswick, and he did abide in the land of Magdeburg, hard by the river
Saale.

In a little time thereafter, so sorrowful was he, that he gave up the
ghost, and left his wife and child in great poverty. Thus it is that
great men are often persecuted and smitten with many blows in their own
land, nor do they find good comfort therein! Owlglass, although he knew
not any handicraft, did grow up and wax older in knavery; and when that
he was sixteen years old, did excel in tricks, quips, and quiddities.




                         The Fourth Adventure.

  _How Owlglass did learn to dance upon a rope, and did fall therefrom
                         into the river Saale._


It hath been said of old time, by the wise and cunning: “When that the
cat is out of the house, then play the mice.” Thus fared it with
Owlglass after that his father was dead. His mother had become old and
full of years, and she could no longer have the mastery over Owlglass,
and he did learn many greatly knavish conceits. And his mother was
sorely troubled of Owlglass, and bore not with his knavery.

Now it fortuned, that the house where Owlglass and his mother did live,
lay hard by the river Saale, and Owlglass did go up into the garret of
the house, and there did learn to dance upon a rope, until that his
mother did find him going to and fro upon the rope, and did so belabour
him with a cudgel, that he fled through the window of the garret on to
the roof, where she could not follow him. And this often came to pass,
until he grew older, and she became weak and of no strength to have
power over him. Then thought he, it was time that he should in open day
render it manifest unto all, how great was his perfection in the art of
dancing upon the rope, and he did stretch the rope across the river
Saale, from one house even unto a house which lay over against them on
the other side. And when that the people beheld such unwonted sport,
they did run together, old and young, in a great crowd, and did marvel
much that Owlglass should go hither and thither in so sure a manner upon
the rope.

Happiness is, however, but for the few, and seldom doth evil fortune
fail to sow sorrowful seeds in the midst of joyous doings; and thus
fortuned it, that the mother of Owlglass did hear the shouting of the
people at the feats of Owlglass, and that she might reprove with heavy
punishment the knavery of her son, she hastened to the place where the
rope was tied, and cut it through with a knife secretly. Then did good
Master Owlglass plump into the water with much mockery and despite; and
all the people did laugh greatly thereat, and Owlglass was vexed, so
that he could speak no word; nor did he fear the bath and the peril of
drowning as much as the jests of the people, who ran after him, blessing
the bath with much outcry. Thus did Master Owlglass come evilly off in
his first undertaking.




                          The Fifth Adventure.

_How Owlglass did move two hundred young people, that they did give unto
   him their shoes, with the which he made rare sport upon his rope._


In no long space of time thereafter, Owlglass did desire to avenge him,
concerning the mockery which befel him after the bath, therefore did he
tie the rope across unto another house, and once again told the people
that he would dance to and fro upon the rope. Soon did the people come
together in great multitude, and there were in that place both old and
young; then Owlglass spake unto the young people, and said that he would
show unto them a most rare device upon the rope with their shoes. Then
did they believe him, and with that put their shoes off their feet and
gave them unto Owlglass, and he did put them all together upon a string
and went up on to the rope; and all the people thought that he was going
to make some wonderful stroke therewith. But the boys were sad, and
would fain have received their shoes again.

When, therefore, Owlglass was sitting upon the rope and had ended his
trickery, he cried out with a loud voice and spake these words: “Be ye
now every one in readiness, and let him seek his shoes again;” and he
cut the string and threw all the shoes upon the ground, in such wise
that one shoe fell upon another into a great heap, and none could be
distinguished. Then did the people, old and young, come in great crowds,
and caught a shoe here and another there; and one spake and said this
was his shoe, whereat another did make answer that it was his; and then
fell they to fisticuffs, and with great blows they pulled out the hairs
from their heads: one lay on the ground, and the other belaboured him
with sturdy strokes; and one wept with a loud voice while another did
laugh, and a third screamed like a peacock. Thus went things forward,
until the old men began also to give many stripes to the crowd.

But Owlglass, sitting upon his rope, laughed until his stomach shook
again, and cried out: “Right merry may ye be! Seek ye your shoes again
in that wise in which I sought my way forth from the bath.” Then did he
come down from his rope, and left them in contention; nor did he again
come forth, for fear of the people, but abode at home with his mother.
Thereover did his mother greatly rejoice, and thought that now he was a
wise and gentle person, and soon, therefore, would things go better with
them all. Yet knew she not of his knavery, and wherefore he dared not go
out. But the wisdom of Owlglass was great; for it is better to abide in
darkness with a whole skin, than live in a palace of light and be beaten
with many stripes. Thus did, therefore, our great example of wit and
judgment.




                          The Sixth Adventure.

   _How that Owlglass his mother did move him that he should learn a
                              handicraft._


The mother of Owlglass was right glad that her son was so still, and
chid him only for that he would learn no handicraft. Yet answered he
never a word unto all her reproofs, the which she was never tired of
bestowing upon him. At last he opened his mouth and spake unto her,
saying: “Dear mother, as it happeneth that one beginneth action, so also
is the ending thereof.” For he knew in his wisdom, that if he had begun
with knavish doings, and should turn therefrom and live honestly, yet in
the world would no one give heed unto him, but the rather regard him as
a greater knave than before, esteeming him to be a hypocrite as well as
a knave. “That believe I right truly,” answered his mother; “and thus
have I seen no bread in my house these four weeks gone by, nor have I
had thereof any.” “That toucheth not my speech,” said Owlglass. “But
with Saint Nicolaus must the poor man fast upon his even; and if
perchance he should have bread, he may feast right merrily with Saint
Martin on his day. Therefore will we also eat.”




                         The Seventh Adventure.

 _How Owlglass did deceive a baker at Strasfurt, and gat bread for his
                                mother._


Then thought Owlglass: “God help us, how shall I compass it that my
mother may be rendered quiet? Where shall I get me bread for her needs?”
Thus went he forth from the village where they abode, and departed on
the way towards the town of Strasfurt, and there beheld he a baker’s
shop. Then went he in unto the baker, and asked him, saying: “Would he
for a crown send bread unto his lord?” Then named he the name of a lord
who abode in that town, and also the place where he lay, that the baker
might send with Owlglass a boy to carry the bread and receive the money
therefor.

Thereat answered the baker, that he would do everything that he
commanded, and Owlglass gave him a sack wherein to count the loaves; but
this sack had a secret hole, not to be seen. The baker sent with him a
lad to receive the money.

Now when Owlglass had gat him a bow-shot from the house of the baker, he
privily let a wheaten loaf fall down into the mire, and thereat set he
the bag down and said unto the baker’s lad: “Alas! the bread which is
thus made dirty I can never bring in unto my lord. Run quickly home and
get for it another loaf, and I will wait here till that thou dost come
again.” Then hasted the good lad to his master’s house, and did get
another loaf for him; but Owlglass secretly hid himself in a house
outside the town until that a cart came by, which did receive him and
his bag; and he returned unto the house of his mother.

When that the lad came back unto the place where Owlglass had let the
loaf fall, he found that he was beguiled; and he went back and told his
master, who speedily ran unto the inn where lay the worshipful lord of
whom Owlglass spake, and he asked the serving-men of that lord for
Owlglass; but they knew him not. Then the baker perceived that he was
cheated of his bread, and so returned home. But Owlglass gave the bread
to his mother, and bade her to feast with Saint Martin. Thus can a great
man ever overcome the besetting evils of life.




                         The Eighth Adventure.

 _How Owlglass with other children, was forced to eat fat soup, and gat
                            blows likewise._


There was in the village where Owlglass lived with his mother, a custom
that when anyone killed a pig, the neighbour’s children came to him in
his house to eat a soup or broth, which was called the butcher-broth.
Now there lived in this village a farmer who was avaricious, and yet he
dared not to refuse the children the soup; then thought he of a cunning
way by which he might make them sick of the soup-eating; and he cut into
it the sour crumb of the bread.

When the boys and girls came, Owlglass also was among them, and he let
them come in, and closed the doors and poured out the soup, and the
broth was more than the children could eat; when one of them was full
and was going away, the farmer had a rod with the which he struck him,
so that each child was forced to eat more than it wished. The host knew
well of the knavery of Owlglass, and therefore when that he was beating
another child he always bestowed some hearty strokes upon him. And this
did he for so long, as that they had ended all the eating, and that they
felt like the dogs after grass-grazing. Thereafter would no one go unto
the stingy farmer’s house to eat the butcher-broth.




                          The Ninth Adventure.

_How Owlglass brought it about that the stingy farmer’s poultry drew for
                                baits._


The next day, when he that had beaten the children went forth, Owlglass
met him, and he said unto Owlglass: “Dear Owlglass, when wilt thou come
again to eat the butcher-soup at my house?” “Yea, that will I,” answered
Owlglass, “when thy poultry draw for baits, and four and four together
fight for a little bread.” Then said the other: “Wilt thou be so long?”
But Owlglass said: “An if I came ere the time of the fat soup hath
come?” Then he went on his way and thought over it until the time that
the man’s poultry ran about the streets; then had Owlglass some twenty
strings tied together at the midst, and at either end of the string was
a morsel of bread hanging. These took he and threw to the poultry. When
then the fowls here and there picked up and swallowed the bread, they
could not keep hold, for at the other end another fowl was pulling, so
that they were contending, and thus from the size of the bread they
could not get rid of it, and so stood more than thirty fowls one over
against the other and in throttling ran a wager.




                          The Tenth Adventure.

_How Owlglass was again moved of his mother to depart to a foreign land,
                   that he might learn a handicraft._


After that Owlglass had played a bitter knavery somewhere, so that he
might not dare show himself, he sat at home with his mother; and she,
with many words, continually chid him, in that he would learn no craft
to get money thereby. And she spake unto him saying, that he should
depart into a foreign land, that he might there profit somewhat. But his
mother had just killed a pig and so long as our good master Owlglass
knew that any of it remained he would not quit. The mother of Owlglass
thereat scolded him, until that he agreed to set forth, and made a small
bundle of clothes and food, and, at length, went his way. Soon our wise
master felt hungry, and thereat took forth from his wallet the provision
he had, and did eat until there was none left. Thereafter did he not
tarry long on thought, but when that it was dark, came again to the
house of his mother. Then went he up to the garret and lay among the
straw, where he slept lustily until the day had broken, then wake he up
by reason of a noise he did hear in the neighbour’s court. And Owlglass
did look forth, and beheld a fox stealing the poultry from the roosting
place. Then could Owlglass no longer keep silent, but cried with a loud
voice: “Alas! thou cunning thief, an if I were not in a far country from
this, it would go hard with thee but I would kill thee.” Then heard the
mother of Owlglass what he said, and came and marvelled not a little at
beholding him.




                        The Eleventh Adventure.

 _How Owlglass crept into a bee-hive, how two thieves came by night to
steal honey, what honey they did steal, and how Owlglass made it to come
 to pass, that the thieves did fight one with the other, and did leave
                        the bee-hive standing._


Upon a time went Owlglass with his mother to the dedication of the
church.[9] And at the feast there he drank so much, did our good
Owlglass, that he was tired, and he sought a place where he might lie
down to sleep in peace. Then found he a yard where stood many bee-hives,
and some were empty, and into one of these crept he privily and thought
to sleep awhile; behold he slept from midday till midnight, and his
mother thought surely that he had departed homeward again, as she
nowhere could see him. That same night came two thieves and they had it
in mind to steal a hive of honey, and they conferred together, in that
they heard it said that the heaviest is also the best.

[Illustration: HOW OWLGLASS CATCHETH THE THIEVES.]

Then did they lift up one after the other to see the which might be the
most heavy, and at last came they to the one in which lay good master
Owlglass; and it was the heaviest of all. Then spake the one to the
other, saying: “Here is the best among the bee-hives.” So took they that
one and carried it away, but wist not what good burden they bare. Good
Master Owlglass, feeling the motion, thereupon awoke up, and heard what
they said about stealing honey; and he rejoiced in himself to think what
honey they had stolen. It was now so dark that ye could not see your
hand before ye, an if ye even held it up to your eyes. Then put Owlglass
his hand from out of the bee-hive, and caught hold of the foremost thief
by the hair and pulled it until he roared. And the thief was very angry
at the one who was behind, and thought it was he who had plucked him by
the hair. Then spake the one who was behind him, saying: “Dost thou
dream, or goest thou to sleep? How could I pluck thee by the hair?
Hardly, is it possible for me to hold the bee-hive with both my hands.”
Then laughed Owlglass within himself at what the thief said, and thought
that the game would go better in a while after, and waited till they had
got a fine distance further forward. Then put he out his hand again, and
plucked the hindmost smartly by the hair; and the hindmost man became
yet more angry and said: “Thou sayest I pluck thee by the hair and I
bear the bee-hive till I break my neck, and now thou pluckest me by the
hair thyself.” Then answered the foremost: “I pull thee by the hair?
thou liest in thy throat. I cannot see my way before my face, and yet
sayest thou: I pluck thine hair, quotha!” Thus with many revilings did
they carry the hive along. And, as they were thus quarreling the one
with the other in great choler and wrath, Owlglass plucked the foremost
one by the hair again, and that so hard that he knocked his head against
the hive. Thereat grew he angry, and let down the hive, and took his
fellow by the head. That did also the other, and did manfully resist the
blows of his comrade. Then fought they until they fell down in the dark
and neither of them could behold the other, for the darkness continued
very thick. Thus lost they their way and fled asunder with a great cry,
and the bee-hive stood in the place where they had left it. Then
Owlglass lay down again at ease to sleep until dawn; and when that it
was light he thanked his stars that by this adventure it was shown him
that he should see the world. And then gat he up from out of the
bee-hive and did take a road, which lay before him, having a good heart
that by his wit, wisdom, and knavery, he would live a merry and happy
life in his time, and not die unhonoured of those that should come after
him.

-----

Footnote 9:

  Feasts of the Dedication. These feasts, common in Germany, were also
  not uncommon, even to the present century, in parts of England. They
  were held in the churchyard on the anniversary of the day of the
  parish church being dedicated for divine service. See in _Tom Brown’s
  School Days_ (p. 30), a recent eloquent country-book, for a mention of
  this as applying to Berkshire.




                         The Twelfth Adventure.

_How Owlglass for little money did have a singing bird for his dinner._


In no long time thereafter, came Owlglass to Würzburg and there entered
he into a good inn. Now the host of the inn had a singing bird hanging
up in the house by the which he set great price, for it could sing
divers merry ditties and songs of marvellous choiceness. Then said
Owlglass unto him: “What take ye for this bird!” Then the host, who was
of a miserly mind, answered him a great sum, the which Owlglass would
not give him, yet at last they agreed that Owlglass should have the bird
for four shillings. Then spake Owlglass: “Take ye the bird and roast it
for my dinner, I would fain have a bit of him.” Thereat marvelled the
host, and did much pity the bird; but his miserly love overcame him.
Then was the bird killed, plucked, and made ready. When that it was
roasted, the landlord brought it on a dish to Owlglass; then spake
Owlglass, and commanded the host that he should cut him therefrom a
piece for six pennies; for he had not said he would pay for a whole
bird, but only for a part thereof which he was fain to eat. Thereat
marvelled the host still more, yet what could he say thereupon. He that
is wise sayeth but little when the beguiler is nigh at hand, so the host
held his tongue and the knave Owlglass departed thence in haste.




                       The Thirteenth Adventure.

     _How Owlglass did eat the roasted chicken from off the spit._


In the land of Brunswick there lieth a village, within the government of
Magdeburg, and the name of it is called Budenstadt; thither came
Owlglass and did present himself unto the priest there, and the priest,
thinking our wise and pious master Owlglass a good and proper fellow,
did then hire him for a servant in his house, but little did he know
him. And the priest spake unto him, saying that he should have a good
time of it and a good service. Also should he have meat and drink as
good as his maid-servant, and all that he did should be done with half
labour. Then did Master Owlglass agree with him, and said that he would
do according to his word. Then he saw that the cook had but one eye. On
that day took she two young chickens and she put them on the spit to
roast over the fire. And she bade Owlglass turn, and so he did; and when
the chickens were roasted, he brake one away off from the spit, and did
eat it without any bread, for he remembered well what the priest had
told him as to faring as well as himself and the maid-servant, and he
thought it might be that he would lose his part of the dinner. And when
that it was dinner-time, there came into the kitchen the one-eyed
cook-maid to baste the chickens. Then beheld she but one chicken on the
spit. Then spake she to Owlglass: “Behold, there were two chickens on
the spit, and now there is but one, and tell me now where is the fellow
that was beside it.” Then answered Owlglass: “Woman, do but open your
other eye, and you will behold the other chicken on the spit.” Now when
he thus spake of the want of her eye, she waxed wroth, and ran unto the
priest, and said unto him that he might look how his new serving-man was
doing. That she had put two chickens on the spit, and lo! there was but
one at this time. And she said: “Then he mocked me, and said that I had
but one eye.” Thereat went the priest into the kitchen, and spake unto
Owlglass, saying: “Hearest thou, Owlglass! wherefore didst thou mock my
serving-maid? I see well that only one chicken is now upon the spit, and
yet know I truly that there were two. Where then is now the other?” Then
said Owlglass: “It is yet thereon; open both your eyes, and you will
well see that there be the twain upon the spit. So said I also to thy
maid, and thereat grew she quite angry and wroth.” Then the priest
laughed, and said: “The serving-maid cannot open both her eyes, for in
good truth she hath but one.” Owlglass made answer to the priest,
saying: “That sayest thou, not I.” But then said the priest: “Yet it is
so; but the one chicken is in any wise gone.” Owlglass spake then and
said: “That chicken have I eaten myself, according unto thy words. For
ye said unto me that I should fare as well as your maid-servant; and
much grief would it have caused me had ye eaten the chickens without me,
and made your words vain and a lie. Therefore for your honour’s sake
have I eaten the chicken, that ye might not fall into evil reputation
for speaking that which is untruth.” Then the priest was content and
said: “Dear serving-man, I care not for the roasted chicken; but after
this time do ye always according to the will of my cook.” And Owlglass
said: “Yea, holy father and worshipful master, be it so done as you
will.” Then whatsoever the cook-maid commanded Owlglass that he should
do, that did he but in the half. An if she did bid him to bring a pail
of water from the well, he brought but the half thereof, and if he
should fetch two faggots from the wood pile then brought he but one. And
so did he, and she saw well that it was all performed in that she might
be spited thereat. Then spake the priest once again unto him, and said:
“Lo, my well beloved serving-man Owlglass, let me tell ye that my maid
doth complain right grievously of thee.” Thereat said Owlglass: “Yea,
master, yet have I never done except according unto thy words. For thou
didst say, that all I did should be done with but half labour. Well
would your serving maid desire to see with both eyes and yet hath she
but one—which is but half-seeing, and therefore did I but half-labour.”
And thereat was the priest right merry, and laughed much; but his
servant was full of wrath, and said: “Master, an if ye keep yon knavish
rogue any longer then will I depart from ye.” Thus came it that the
priest was fain to send Owlglass away, yet forgat he him not; and it
fortuned that the parish clerk died, so he made Owlglass clerk in his
room. Thus, by foolishness and little knaveries, do men come in this
world to dignities and honours.




                       The Fourteenth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass did publish abroad that he would fly from off the
                 roof of the town-house at Magdeburg._


After that Owlglass had some time been clerk of the parish at
Budenstadt, came he into the great and famous town of Magdeburg, and
there did he fix upon the church doors letters of great import, so that
the name of Owlglass became well known and noised abroad through the
streets of that city of Magdeburg; and it was in the mouths of all the
gossips, that the noble Master Owlglass did purpose the doing of some
marvellous strange feat. And so it came to pass, that when the people
were all full of great wonder, that Owlglass spake unto them, saying: “I
will flee down through the air from the roof of the town-house.” Thereat
was there a great outcry through the city; and both young and old did in
great multitude crowd unto the market-place, that by them might this
most marvellous wonder be seen; for, in the memory of man, had not any
person ever done so strange a thing before, nor had without wings so
fled down through the air from that high place.

Then came Owlglass and stood upon the roof of the town-house, and did
make motion with his arms, waving them hither and thither, as if he
would flee down. And all the people gazed at his motion in great marvel,
for they thought he would flee down presently. Thereat laughed Owlglass
right merrily, and said unto the people: “Truly thought I, that nowhere
in the world was there a fool so great as am I. Yet here in this city do
I well see that ye are almost every one of ye fools; for when that ye
did say that I could flee down from where I stand, then believed I ye
not. I am not a goose, nor a bird, nor have I either feathers or wings
to flee with, without the which can nobody flee. Therefore manifestly
now do ye well see, that it is a deceit and a lie.”

Then came he down away from the roof of the town-house in the same
manner that he had gone up, and left the people standing. And some of
them laughed, and others said: “Although he is both knave and fool, yet
hath he spoken the truth.” Thus is it with many besides the people of
Magdeburg, who rush eagerly to believe that the which they might see is
most plainly untrue; while what is possible and within their means to
make them good sport, and serve them with good service, that neglect
they with great scorn and contempt.




                        The Fifteenth Adventure.

_How Owlglass did cure the sick folks in the hospital at Nürnberg in one
                    day, and what came thereafter._


On a time came Owlglass to Nürnberg, where he did again set upon the
church doors letters of great import, in the which he did publish abroad
that he was a learned physician, more learned than in the world had yet
been known; and that in all sicknesses, whosoever should turn to him
should have content and his health again.

Now in the hospital at the town were there a multitude of people, who
lay sick unto death, and of them did the master of that house crave in
great truth to be relieved. Right verily would this benevolent man have
given them their health and made them whole, and, if he could, have got
ridden of them in the house. Then went he unto Owlglass, the learned
physician, and spake with him, asking him whether he could, as in his
letters he set forth, work such marvellous cures. And Owlglass answered
and said: “Yea, if that the hospital-master would give unto him two
hundred pieces.” Then upon that conference did the master agree and
promise him the money; and Owlglass said unto him, that he would not
receive from him one penny, if the people did not all, within a few
days, leave the hospital of their own desiring and action. Thereat was
the master of the hospital very content, and gave unto Owlglass twenty
pieces as a hansell.

Thereafter went Owlglass into the hospital, and took with him two
servants; and he asked of each person that was sick, what it was that he
lay sick of, and they answered. And at the last he said unto each, that
he should not betray the secret which he should then tell unto them, and
that swore they all. Then he spake unto each secretly, saying: “If that
I should make ye whole, and give back unto all health and strength, then
must I needs burn one of ye into powder, the which to mingle with your
drink and give you to swallow, and with that will ye be made whole. Now
I will take from among ye the one that is most sick, and him will I burn
to powder. And I will stand at the door of the hospital, with the master
of the hospital near at hand, and I will cry with a loud voice: ‘He that
is not sick, let him now go forth from the house quickly.’ And that one
which is last within the hospital door, him will I take. Forget ye not
that in your sleep.”

Thus it came to pass, that all did remember his words; and when he stood
with the master at the door, the sick and lame, and halt and dying, all
came forth in haste, for none would be that one who should be burned in
fire. So the hospital was quite empty, for many which had not for ten
years arisen from their beds, now found their legs and departed thence.

Then did Owlglass demand from the master of the hospital that he should
receive his reward, and the master with gracious thanks did present it
unto him; then rode he forth from that city, and returned not again. In
three days thereafter, came all the sick folk back again unto the
hospital, and complained sorely of their sickness. Then said the master:
“What will ye? Have I not brought unto ye a physician of skill, who did
marvellously make you whole, that ye could all depart hence?” Then the
sick folk discovered to the master the knavery that Owlglass had done,
in that he had threatened them, that the last that should depart should
be burned. So the master of the hospital perceived that he had been
beguiled of Owlglass, and the sick folk abode in the house: yet was the
money lost. Owlglass still was a great physician, for he had for three
days cured them; and how many learned doctors are there who cure not in
any wise?

[Illustration: HOW OWLGLASS TURNETH DOCTOR.]




                        The Sixteenth Adventure.

 _How Owlglass bought bread according to the proverb: “To him that hath
                        bread is bread given.”_


Trusty faith giveth bread. And now that Owlglass had deceived the
hospital-master, came he unto Halberstadt, and went round about the
market, and saw that it was cold and winter time. Thought he, cold and
hard is the winter, thereto bloweth a strong wind, and thou hast often
heard that to him that hath bread is bread given. Then for a few pence
buyeth Owlglass bread, borroweth also a table, and sitteth down in the
front of St. Stephen’s Dome. There held he up his knavery so long until
a dog came by, the which caught me up a loaf from the table, and ran
toward the cathedral court. While Owlglass ran after the dog, there
passed by a sow with ten young pigs; these overthrew the table, and
each, seizing a loaf, departed.

Then laughed Owlglass and said: “Now do I see that the words are not
true: ‘To him that hath bread is bread given;’ for mine is taken.”
Thereat he departed from Halberstadt unto Brunswick.




                       The Seventeenth Adventure.

        _How Owlglass became a doctor, and did cure many folk._


The City of Frankfort is a great and handsome city, and in it do dwell
many worshipful burghers, whose riches are many, and they eat and drink
much, as is the custom with citizens; thus it fortunes that they are
often ill. No marvel therefore that in Frankfort abide many doctors, who
gain much money. Owlglass when that he came there, by his ready wit soon
perceived the better part to take, and hired himself to be a doctor’s
man, and soon it was meet that he should go with his master to visit the
patients. The good Owlglass would much have desired to know something of
the names on the bottles which stood in the house of his master; but
that could he not do, and therefore of all that his master did he could
learn nothing but that when people were sick, they should drink warm
water and be blooded. It fortuned in no long time thereafter, that his
master had on a sudden to take a journey, in such wise that he had no
time to tell the patients thereof. Then spake he unto Owlglass saying:
“Go thou about the city unto the sick, and say unto them that in no long
time shall I return unto them.”

[Illustration]

Yet the cunning Master Owlglass followed not his master’s saying, but
put on his head the wig of his master, and on his shoulders he bare his
mantle. Then, with a grave and noble demeanour, he departed unto the
houses of the sick patients who sent for him. When that he arrived, he
sat gravely down with a serious face, felt their pulses, and after much
heavy thought, he ordered them always to be blooded and to drink warm
water. Thereafter he departed from them.

Then, marvellous to tell, all his patients grew wondrously well in no
long time, and they paid him much money for his pains. When that his
master returned, the knavery of Owlglass was soon discovered, and he was
fain to depart. Yet such was the wisdom of good Master Owlglass, that it
is related that his master thereafter followed no other art than had
been thus invented by Owlglass; and after that time the doctor became
famous, and wrote a large book upon the virtue of warm water and
blood-letting.




                       The Eighteenth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass became a drawer of teeth and cured all by a wondrous
                                 pill._


As Owlglass was going along the road, he met upon the highway, a man
whose face was overcome with misery. Owlglass thereat gazed upon him for
a season, and after some time spake unto him these words: “Worthy
fellow! thou dost seem so wrapped in melancholic humour, would’st tell
me what aileth thee?” “Everything in the wide world,” the other made
answer: “for I have no money, which is the joy of all worldly business;
for it maketh learned, maketh noble, maketh lovely, and merry. Also,
maketh it an end of hunger and thirst which now sorely assail me.” Then
Owlglass bethought himself for a while, and presently took up from the
next field some clay, whereof he made little pills, which he then
wrapped in pieces of paper, and said to his comrade: “Be of good cheer,
friend! Soon will we have money. Lo, in yonder city, the towers of which
we can now see, are there fools in number great. Enter thou in before
me, and there go forward till thou seest the best inn in the town, and
therein do thou stay. At dinner stay thou as long as thou canst and be
merry; yet after a while do thou cry out in great agony, as if thou
hadst the tooth-ache. Then will I not be far from thee; and when I come
in, be thou ready, and make answer to everything I say: ‘Yea.’ But do
not thou let it be perceived that thou knowest me.”

Then did the twain go forward into the town, and as Owlglass had
commanded, so all things came to pass. Owlglass told the people that he
was a dentist of great skill, and they called him to the man who was
ill. Then took he from his pocket the pills which he had made of the
clay, and laid one in the man’s mouth. “Art not thou well now”? said he
unto him. “Yea, truly,” answered the other, “all the pain is gone.” Then
all the people in the inn came round the doctor in great multitude, and
demanded that he should sell unto them his pills. And Owlglass sold what
he had for a great sum of money, and an he had had clay enough he could
have sold many more. Then shared he the gain with his comrade, and they
departed hastily from that place.




                       The Nineteenth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did at Brunswick hire him to a baker, and did there
                        bake owls and monkeys._


It fortuned upon a time that Owlglass came into Brunswick city, and unto
an inn where bakers met together; and hard by lived a baker, who called
upon Owlglass to enter into his house, and made inquiry of him, as to
the business he might follow. Then answered Owlglass to the baker, and
spake, for our noble and well beloved master of jests was wily, and,
indeed, all things unto all men: “I am a baker’s man.” Thereat said the
baker: “Even now have I not any man in my house to serve me; wilt thou
come to me, for I have need of thee?” Owlglass at that answered: “Yea.”
And when that he had been with him two days, the baker commanded him to
bake at eventide, for that he could not help him until the morning. Then
said Owlglass: “But what would ye have me to bake?” Thereat waxed the
baker wroth, for he was a man soon hot i’ the head, and he made answer
in scorn, and said: “Art a baker’s man, and askest thou what ye should
bake? What do ye bake? Owls and monkeys bake ye?” And thereafter gat he
him to bed.

[Illustration]

Then departed Owlglass into the bake-room, and made the dough into
nought but the shape of owls and monkeys, and these did he bake in the
oven. At morning time arose the master baker, and went into the
bake-room to aid his man. Then cometh he, and findeth neither rolls nor
loaves, but rather a goodly mass of owls and monkeys. And he opened his
mouth in great rage and said unto Owlglass: “What is it that thou hast
baken?” And Owlglass did answer him and said: “Verily have I done that
which thou didst tell me to do.” And the baker, in great wroth, said:
“What shall I do with this foolish knave? Such bread will no one have?”
And therewith took he him by the head, and said unto him: “Pay me for
the dough thou hast spoiled!” Then said Owlglass: “And if I pay ye for
the dough, will the goods be mine?” And the master answered: “What care
I for such bread?” So Owlglass paid the baker for his dough, and he took
the owls and monkeys in a basket, and he carried them away unto the inn,
the sign of which was the Wild Man. And Owlglass thought within himself:
“Thou hast often heard it said, that to Brunswick canst thou bring
nothing novel or strange, but therefrom mayst thou draw great profit for
thy pains.” And it was Saint Nicholas’ even. Then stood Owlglass with
his store hard by the church gate; and he sold all his owls and monkeys
at great price, and therefrom drew he a much greater profit than what he
had paid unto the baker for his dough. This was noised about, and soon
came it heard of the baker, who waxed very angry thereupon, and he ran
unto Saint Nicolas’ Church, and would have demanded either his share, or
the charges of baking. But Owlglass had already departed with the money,
and the baker might look far and wide for him. This feat of our good
exemplar showeth plainly, that there is nothing so vain or foolish in
this world, but that it hath profit contained within it for those who
study to arrive thereat.




                        The Twentieth Adventure.

_How Owlglass did again hire him unto a baker, and how he bolted meal in
                           the moon’s light._


Thereafter departed Owlglass, and wandered hither and thither in the
land; and at last came he toward Oltzen, and entered into the village
there. And when he was besought of the people to say what trade he
exercised, he told them that he was a baker. Then did a master baker in
the village hire him; and when that Owlglass was with him present in his
house, his master did make ready that he should bake, and he spake unto
Owlglass, and did enjoin him that he should bolt the meal, so that it
might be prepared against the morning. Then Owlglass answered, and said:
“Master, I would fain have a candle, that I may see with, and so
diligently do your bidding.” “Nay,” answered the baker; “but that will I
not do. No candle shalt thou have, nor have I at any time given unto my
serving-men any such candle. Always did they bolt the meal in the moon’s
light, and verily must thou likewise do this. And this charge I thee to
do.” And Owlglass made answer, saying: “An if your former servants did
bolt the meal in the moon’s light, truly then will I also do it.” At
that was the master content, and he gat him to bed for a short while.

Thereafter taketh good Master Owlglass the bag, and he openeth the
window and putteth forth the bag, until the moon’s light doth shine
thereupon, and then letteth he all the meal fall out on the ground where
that the moon shone. And in the morning cometh the master, who desireth
to bake, and he findeth Owlglass still casting out the meal. And the
baker marvelled much when that he beheld Owlglass, for Owlglass was
white with the meal. Then said the master, who was full of anger: “What
do ye here, ye knave? Think ye that yon meal cost me nought, that ye
throw it in the dirt there?”

Then answered Owlglass: “Did not ye command me that I should, without a
candle, bolt the meal in the moon’s shine, and have not I fulfilled this
according to your words?” Then said the baker: “I said you should bolt
the meal by the moon’s light.” And Owlglass answered him: “Be then of
good cheer, master; verily thy meal is bolted both in and by the moon’s
light, and with much pains and weariness have I done this labouring. Nor
is there much lost thereby; scarce a handful. Soon will I gather it up
again, and the meal will not be in any wise made the worse.” Thereat
sayeth the baker: “In that time that thou dost gather up the meal, will
it grow too late to make the dough, and then fall to baking.” Then said
Owlglass: “Behold, master, I know a piece of counsel, how we may bake as
soon as our neighbour yonder. His dough lieth ready in the trough, and I
will go thither and quickly fetch it, and carry our meal thither in
place thereof.” Thereat grew the master of Owlglass right angry, and
said unto him: “May the evil one have thee! Get thee to the
gallows-tree, thou knave, and fetch thee thence the first thing that
thou dost find; and let the neighbour’s dough lie where it be.” “Yea,”
answered Owlglass.

Then departed he out of the house and went unto the gallows-tree, and
there lay the skull of a thief, which had fallen down. This took
Owlglass and bare it unto his master, and brought it into his house and
said: “Here bring I from the gallows-tree the first thing that I did
find. Wherefore would ye have this? Of a truth know I not what may be
the best thing it is fit for.” And then the baker spake in anger, and
said: “Lo! bringest thou me nothing more than this?” Then Owlglass
answered and said: “If that any other thing had been there, I would also
have brought it for thee; but no other thing was lying there.” Then
waxed the baker more wroth, and said unto Owlglass: “Behold, thou hast
robbed the law and the gallows; that will I tell unto the burghmaster,
and thou shalt answer it.”

And the baker departed from out of the house to the market-place, and
Owlglass followed him. So hastily, howsoever, went the baker, that he
looked not round, and knew not that Owlglass was following him. Then
stood the baker before the burghmaster, who was on the market-place, and
he began to make complaint against Owlglass. And Owlglass was lithe and
nimble, and when that the baker began his words, he stood hard by and
opened his eyes very wide. And when the baker beheld Owlglass, he clean
forgat, in his anger, what it might be that he would make complaint of,
and said to Owlglass, with great malice: “What wilt thou have?” Owlglass
made answer to him: “I desire not to have anything, than that I should
behold what complaint you make against me to the burghmaster. And that I
might see your words, do I open mine eyes very wide, for words are most
difficult to see.” Then said the baker: “Get out of my sight, thou
knavish beguiler, I desire nought else!” Owlglass then said: “If that I
should get out of thy sight, then needs must I get my body into thine
eyes; and if ye shut your eyes, must I come through thy nostrils.” Then
went the burghmaster on his way, for he perceived that it was but
foolishness; and he left them both standing. And when Owlglass saw that,
he followed the baker, and spake unto him, saying: “Master, when shall
we bake? It is time now, for the sun shineth no more.” Then departed he,
and left the baker standing in the market-place.




                    The Twenty and First Adventure.

_Telleth of what manner of thinking was Owlglass, and how he formed his
        life according unto principles of virtue and goodness._


Of our most noble and beloved Master Owlglass, have I now told ye not a
few truthful and diverting histories and adventures; but, yet have I not
said any word in respect of his ways of thinking, gathered by great
experience out of many lands, in his continual travel to and fro, up and
down in his country. Now he loved much to be always among friends and in
company, and as long as he lived were there three things, which with
great avoidance he did always run from and leave undone. The first thing
was, that he never did ride a horse which was gray, but at all times a
bay horse, for the gray horse did mind him of an ass, the which animal
held he in great scorn. The second thing which he could not bear to be
with him was the company of little children, for that wheresoever he
found them, there was more care taken of them than of his own noble
person. The third thing was, that he would never lie in an inn where
that he found an old mild host; for a host that was old and mild held
Owlglass in but little esteem, and was thereto also for the most part
nought but a fool.

Every morn when that he rose up from his bed, he blessed himself against
healthy victual, great happiness, and strong drink, in which three
blessings none can deny that he was a wise man. And when it fortuned
that he passed by an apothecary’s house, did he bless himself against
healthy victual, for it mote truly be a healthy place whence victual
might issue; yet it was a sign of sickness before. Good fortune was it
when a stone fell from the house top and struck him not down; for then
might he of a truth cry, with great praise: “If that I had myself been
standing on that place, so would it have fallen upon me and killed me;”
and such fortune would he most willingly not have. The strong drink
against which he blessed himself, was water, for it be so strong as soon
to drive round great mill-wheels, and to the good fellow that drinketh
thereof cometh death. It was also told of Owlglass that he wept always
when that he did go down a hill, and he laughed when he climbed one. For
truly wist he, in the descending, that soon would he come again unto a
mountain, while in climbing knew he that soon would he come again to the
top, whence to pass down into the valley. In fine weather, or at a time
when summer began, then did he also weep with many tears, and when that
winter approached, laughed he. And ye that read herein may, in your
wisdom, answer the reason why he did this thing.




                    The Twenty and Second Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did hire him to the Count of Anhalt to blow the horn
 on a tower, and when that enemies did approach, then blew he not; and
                when that they came not, then blew he._


[Illustration]

Not long thereafter, came Owlglass unto the Count of Anhalt, and he did
hire him unto the count as a tower watchman. And the count at that time
had enemies in great multitude, so that he had with him in number not
small, both horsemen and foot folk, unto whom he must needs give meat
and drink every day. And Owlglass sat up on the tower, and he was clean
forgat of them that should give him provision. And on that day it came
to pass, that the enemy did, in strong force, come unto the town and
castle of the count’s grace, and they took therefrom all the cattle, and
drave them off. Owlglass then lay still upon the tower, and he looked
through the window and made not any outcry, either in that he blew, or
in that he did cry aloud. But it did come unto the ears of the count
that he heard the enemy, and with his folk he quickly gat him forth, and
pursued them and drave them before his face. Then saw some of the folk,
that Owlglass lay in the window of the tower, and laughed. Thereat did
the count cry out unto him: “Wherefore liest thou on the tower and art
so still?” And Owlglass made answer unto the count, saying: “Ere dinner
time do I not with grace and comfort ever delight in crying out.” Then
cried the count back unto him: “Wilt thou, when the enemy cometh, blow
thy horn?” Thereat said Owlglass: “Enemies dare I not blow, or would the
field be full, and with the cows would they depart. And if I blew
enemies a second time, in such multitude would they come, that they
would fight with thee, and overcome thee even in thine own gate.”
Therewith ended they their conference. Then departed the count in great
haste after his enemies, and contended with them with much strife; and
Owlglass was again forgotten as he lay upon his tower.

But the count was greatly content with his prowess, and with him brought
back from the field of battle a goodly heap of pork, the which did they
thereafter cut up, and some roasted they and other did they boil. And
Owlglass would most willingly have had thereof as he sat on his tower.
Then did he begin to plan how that he might get thereof, and he did
watch when that it should be dinner time. And when that it had become
dinner time, he began to blow his horn, and to cry with a loud voice:
“The foe cometh! The foe cometh!” Then the count gat him up with his
arms, and put on his harness, and took his weapons, and departed quickly
forth from the castle into the field. Thereat rejoiced our noble Master
Owlglass, and quickly did he get him down from the tower, and came unto
the count’s table, and took therefrom boiled and roast, in the which
delighted he, and he returned back on his steps, and gat him to the
tower. And, when that the horsemen and foot folk came again unto the
castle, and of enemies had found not a hair, then murmured they one to
the other, saying: “This hath the watchman done to mock us with great
scorn and knavery.” And the count cried aloud unto Owlglass, and said
unto him: “Wherefore hast thou become foolish and mad?” And Owlglass
said: “If that hunger and thirst drive mad, then do I not marvel at my
madness.” Thereat said the count: “Why didst thou blow on thy horn for
enemies, and there were none?” Then spake Owlglass, and made answer unto
the count, saying: “Whereas it fortuned that no enemies were present, I
thought in my mind that it would be well to blow on my horn, for that
they might come.” Then said the count unto him: “Thou goest about to
deceive us with knavish beguiling. When that the enemy cometh, thou wilt
not blow; yet when no enemy is nigh at hand, then blowest thou. Of a
truth, it is a matter of treachery.” Therewith relieved he Owlglass of
lying in the tower, and appointed thereunto another watchman.

Then came it to pass, that Owlglass should run with the foot folk to
strive in battle with the enemy. And thereat was good Master Owlglass
moved to anger, and cast about in his mind to discover how he might be
relieved, and obtain other service. And when the count’s folk departed
out from the castle to fight with the foe, then was Owlglass always the
last man; and when they returned back unto the castle, was he truly
likewise the first man to enter therein. Then spake the count unto him,
saying: “How shall I understand this thing? Wherefore art thou always
last to depart from the castle, and the first to return back again?” And
Owlglass answered and said: “Let not thine anger fall upon me, noble
lord; for when that thou and all thy people sat and ate and drank, with
great feasting, then lay I upon the tower and fasted so that I fainted
thereby, and lost much strength. If therefore ye should be minded, that
I should be the first in the field to encounter the foe, I pray thee
that ye do let me eat now that with strength may I be filled, and then
will I do it, and ye shall perceive that I shall be the first against
the enemy and the last to depart from him.” “I mark well,” spake the
count, “that thou wilt be a long time in doing this thing, and as long
as thou didst sit on the tower.” Thereat said Owlglass: “That which
belongeth of right unto a man do others take from him most willingly.”
And the count said: “Long shalt thou not be my servant,” and therewith
gave him leave to depart. And thereat rejoiced Owlglass, for he cared
not every day to fight with the enemy.




                    The Twenty and Third Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did have golden shoes struck unto his horse’s feet._


Owlglass was one of those men that the fame of his holy doings came unto
the ears of many great lords. The princes, also, loved him much, and did
give unto him garments, horses, money, and provision. And he came unto
the King of Denmark, who said unto him, that he should do for him a
wondrous strange thing, having his horse shod with the best shoes that
could be found. Then answered Owlglass to the king, and spake unto him
and asked him: “If that he should believe him?” And the king answered
and said: “Yea, and if he did according unto his word, it should come to
pass as he had promised him.” Then Owlglass did ride his horse unto the
goldsmith’s house, and there had golden shoes, with nails of silver,
struck unto his horse’s feet, and gat him home again unto the king’s
presence, and asked him if that he would pay for the shoeing of his
horse? The king said: “Yea, that would be right truly;” and said unto
his treasurer, and commanded him, that he should pay for the shoeing of
the horse of Owlglass. The treasurer thought that it had been done by a
blacksmith. And Owlglass led him unto the goldsmith’s house, and the
goldsmith demanded of him one hundred golden marks therefor. The
treasurer would not pay this; but went and told the king thereof. Then
sent the king for Owlglass, and said unto him: “Owlglass, how dear hast
thou made this horse shoeing to be? If that all my horses were shod as
thou hast had thine, soon should I have to sell my country and my
people!” Then Owlglass answered and spake unto him: “My gracious lord
and king, thou didst say I should have my horse to be shod with the best
shoes, and have I not done according unto thy words, for would ye have
better shoeing than silver and gold.” Then said the king: “Thou art my
dearest servant, thou dost that I tell thee to do.” And the king laughed
at the merry jest, and did pay the hundred marks. Then Owlglass brake
off the golden shoes from his horse’s feet, and had shoes of iron struck
on, and he abode with the king unto the day of his death.




                    The Twenty and Fourth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did have a great contention before the King of Poland
                         with two other fools._


While that the noble Prince Casimir, King of Poland, yet lived, there
came unto him at his court, good Master Owlglass. And Casimir (blessed
be his memory!) did have two fools there, who, in knavery, could not be
overcome. And the king of Poland had heard much said of Owlglass, that,
in truth, he was not in any way to be quipped or deceived. Nor did
Owlglass agree with the fools of the king, and that beheld the king
right soon. Then spake the king unto Owlglass and the two fools, saying:
“Behold! unto that one of ye the which can wish the greatest wish will I
give a coat and twenty gold pieces thereto, and this shall be within my
presence.” Then said the first fool: “I would have that heaven were
nothing but paper, and the sea nothing but ink, that therewith might I
in figures write down how much money I would have, and that it came unto
me.” The second spake, saying: “I would have as many towers and castles
as there be stars in heaven, so that therein might I hold all the money
that my fellow here would have.” Then was it time that Owlglass should
speak, and the king thought that in truth he could not wish anything
greater. But Owlglass opened his mouth and spake, saying: “I, in truth,
would desire that after ye two have made me your heir, that the king
would yet on this day hang ye both.” Thereat laughed the king right
merrily, and Owlglass won the coat and the twenty gold pieces, with the
which he departed in joy.




                    The Twenty and Fifth Adventure.

   _How Owlglass did make confession to a priest, and took from him a
                              silver box._


On a time it happened that Owlglass thought to go to confession, for his
sins were many, and therewith was his soul sore laden, so that he
meditated much on the badness of his ways. Then came he to the church,
where sate the priest in the confessional, and before him stood a silver
box, by which he set great store. Then Owlglass began a long speech, in
the which he told the good priest his heavy sins, so great in number;
and at last, the saying of Owlglass was so long, that the priest did
lean back and slept, for he was weary of the knaveries of Owlglass. Then
Owlglass took the box away, and did put it in pouch.

When that the priest again awoke he did rub his eyes with his fingers,
and spake unto Owlglass, saying: “Where stood we, my son?” Then answered
Owlglass, and said unto the priest: “We stood at the eighth commandment,
father.” Then said the priest: “Speak on, my son; fear not, nor in any
wise conceal what lieth upon thy conscience.” Then continued Owlglass,
saying: “Alas! holy father, on a time I did steal a silver box from a
person, and I will now give it unto thee.” Then said the priest: “Nay,
my son, stolen goods will I not have; give the box unto him that owneth
it.” “That would I already do,” answered Owlglass; “but he refused me,
saying that he would not receive it.” Thereat spake the priest, and
said: “Then canst thou keep it with a good conscience; go in peace, thy
sins are forgiven thee.”

Then Owlglass departed, and sold the box unto a Jew for several pieces
of silver. But the priest slept not again in confession; and thus
Owlglass gat for others more sins forgiven than before, which did great
good unto all men.




                    The Twenty and Sixth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass was forbidden the dukedom of Lunenburg, and how he
               did cut open his horse and stand therein._


In the land of Lunenburg, near unto Zell, did Owlglass work some great
knavery on a time. Therefore did the Duke of Lunenburg forbid him the
land; and he gave commandment to his servants, if that Owlglass should
be found therein they should seize him, and, without any mercy or
shrift, hang him up. Yet did not Owlglass in any manner forsake the
land, or in his journeyings avoid it, so as to come round through any
other country; but when that it came in his way to be convenient to pass
through Lunenburg, did he nevertheless ride or walk through it when he
would.

Thus it came to pass on a time, that Owlglass had much reason to ride
through Lunenburg, and it fortuned that as he was riding along, he saw
the duke with many folk riding the same way. Then thought he within
himself: “Lo! it is the duke; and if that thou dost hasten away to fly
from before his face, then with their horses will they soon come up with
thee, and they will take thee; then will the duke with great anger come
and command them to hang thee up unto a tree.” Then did he confer within
himself what thing it were best that he should do; and he gat him down
from his horse, and took a knife, and quickly cut open the horse’s
belly, casting forth the entrails, and then gat he in and stood within
the four legs in the midst. Then when the duke came riding by with his
horsemen, and gat to the place where sat Owlglass in his horse’s belly,
then the servants of the duke spake unto him, saying: “Behold, gracious
lord, here sitteth Owlglass within his horse.” Thereat did the duke ride
up to Owlglass, and say unto him: “Art thou there, Owlglass? What
bringeth thee into my country when that I did warn thee with great
punishment not to come thither? Did I not say, if ye came therein I
would have thee hanged on a tree?” Then said Owlglass to the duke:
“Noble and gracious lord, I pray thee that thou wilt be pleased to spare
my life, for I have not done so evilly as to be punished with death.”
Then said the duke unto Owlglass: “Come thee hither unto me, and do thou
make thy innocence plain unto me, or what meanest thou that thou dost so
stand in the belly of thy horse?” And Owlglass answered, and said: “Most
high and gracious lord! have I not heard it always said of all that from
old time between his own four posts is a man safe? Now do I stand in
such wise between my four posts, as ye can see; for I feared the
displeasure with the which I knew in my heart that ye would visit me,”
Then did the duke laugh right merrily, and said unto Owlglass: “Yea,
this time will I excuse thee. But wilt thou henceforward stay far away
from my land, nor enter it at any time?” And Owlglass answered and said:
“Gracious lord, so mote it be as ye would have.” Thereat rode the duke
away from him, saying: “Stay as ye now be.” But Owlglass leaped quickly
forth from his horse’s skin, and spake unto the dead horse: “I thank
thee, my good beast, for thou hast preserved my neck from great danger
of the halter, and through thy death am I made alive. From a hunted
donzel hast thou changed me into a gentleman; therefore, lie thou there,
for it is better that the crows eat thee than that they should tear me.”
Then departed he out of the land on foot.




                   The Twenty and Seventh Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did buy an inheritance in land from a boor, and how
                      he sate therein in a cart._


In no long time thereafter came Owlglass again into the land of
Lunenburg, and he tarried in a village near unto Zell, until the time
came in the which the Duke should again ride that way. And it came to
pass that a boor did come by Owlglass as he went along to plough his
land. And by that time had Owlglass gotten him another horse, and a cart
therewith, and he came unto the boor, and spake unto him, saying: “Whose
land is this that thou ploughest?” Then answered the boor and said:
“Truly is it mine, and I did have it in inheritance from my forbears.”
Thereat said Owlglass unto the boor: “What money wilt thou have for as
much earth as would fill my cart?” Then said the boor: “Truly will I
have a shilling therefor.” And Owlglass gave unto him what he demanded,
and filled his cart therewith, and crept into it, and drove his cart
into Zell unto the castle there, unto the Aller water. And when that it
came to pass that the duke rode by, did he behold Owlglass as he sate in
the cart with the earth up to his shoulders. Then spake the duke unto
Owlglass, and said unto him: “How comest thou here again? Have I not
forbidden thee to come into my land, and did not I say thou shouldst
suffer death? And now, after that I pardoned thee when thou didst stand
in thy horse, thou dost again tempt my wrath with thee?” Then spake
Owlglass unto the duke in answer, saying: “My gracious lord, I am not in
your land but in mine own, wherein do I sit; and I bought it of a boor
for a shilling, and rightfully could he sell it, for from his forbears
hath he inherited it. So is this truly my land.” Then spake the duke,
and laughed the while: “Depart ye now straightway with thy land out of
my land, and come not again, or will I have thee hung up, with thy horse
and thy cart beside.” Then leaped Owlglass on to his horse from out of
the cart, and left the cart with his land standing before the castle.




                    The Twenty and Eighth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass painted the forbears of the Landgrave of Hessen, and
   told him that an if he were ignobly born, he might not behold his
                               painting._


Many marvellous things did Owlglass bring to pass in the land of Hessen.
After that he had journeyed up and down in the country of Saxony, and
his fame had spread so abroad that no longer dare he work his knaveries
and beguilings in that land, came our worshipful Master forth from
Saxony, and did enter into the land of Hessen, and came therein unto
Marburg, unto the Landgrave where that he kept his court. Then inquired
the landgrave of Owlglass, what manner of man he was and what he could
do. Then answered Owlglass, and said: “Lord, I know the arts, and that
manner of man am I, and your humble servant.” Thereat rejoiced the
landgrave greatly, for he thought that Owlglass was an alchymist, and in
alchymy had the landgrave much delight. Then spake he unto him, saying:
“Art thou an alchymist?” And Owlglass answered: “Nay, that am I not, in
good sooth, for of dross make not I gold, but rather quite the other
thing. Yet am I a painter, the equal unto whom can be nowhere found in
any country, for my work is far better than the work of any other
painter.” Then said the landgrave: “Come, let us now look upon some of
thy work.” And Owlglass said: “Yea, my lord.” And he had with him some
paintings cunningly devised, the which he had brought out of Flanders.
These took he from his wallet, and displayed them before that prince.
These pleased the lord much, and he said unto Owlglass: “Worshipful sir
painter, what money will ye have if that ye would paint on the wall of
our castle hall the story of the family of the landgraves of Hessen, and
how that through them I became friendly unto and with the King of
Hungary, and other lords and princes, and how long the land of Hessen
hath been established? And that must ye tell me in the wise that will be
most costly and precious.” Then answered Owlglass: “Behold, most
gracious prince, if that ye would have it so rarely done, it might truly
cost not less than four hundred marks.” Then answered the landgrave, and
said unto Owlglass: “Master, an if you do but make it rarely, the money
shall not fail, nor will we forget to reward thee as ye shall deserve.”
Then did Owlglass consent to become the painter of the picture; and
thereat gave the landgrave unto Owlglass one hundred marks so that he
might buy colours therewith.

But when that Owlglass came with three servants he had found, to see
what the work was which was to be done, he gat him unto the landgrave,
and spake unto him, and entreated him, saying: “Behold, noble prince, I
would crave a grace from ye, which I would ask that ye should grant unto
me.” Then spake the landgrave: “Yea, that I will grant thee. Speak on.”
And Owlglass answered, and said: “The grace I crave from thee is, that,
while my work is going forward, no one shall enter without that they ask
of me whether they may enter therein.” And therewith the landgrave
granted Owlglass the grace he desired. Then conferred Owlglass with his
men, and said unto them, that they must take an oath unto him not to
betray him; and so did they. And he said unto them, that they need not
do any kind of labour, but they might play at tables and chess and other
merry pastimes. And thereat were the men content; nor was it greatly
marvellous that in such wise they should be, for Owlglass did promise to
pay them for serving him after this manner.

[Illustration]

Then it came to pass, after some three or four weeks had gone by, that
the landgrave craved much to see in what measure the painting of
Owlglass was ready, and whether, of a truth, it did resemble the
ensamples which Owlglass had shewn unto him, which were so goodly and
fair. Thereat gat he him to Owlglass, and said unto him: “Alas, most
worshipful master, I would fain come into the hall and see in what
measure my picture doth grow ready.” Then Owlglass spake unto the
landgrave, and answered him, and said: “Yea, and that shall ye also do.
But I must tell unto thee a marvellous secret which doth touch all my
painting, in that no one, if he be ignobly born, or not according unto
the ordinance of Holy Church, can behold my painting to see it.” The
landgrave said thereafter: “Truly that is a marvellous thing.” Yet, my
masters, ye may perceive in that the landgrave was an alchymist, so had
he also more belief in such affairs than cometh unto the lot of all men.
And then went he with Owlglass into the hall, and there had Owlglass
hanged up a white cloth, that he should have painted. And with a white
wand did he point to the wall when that he had with his hand put the
cloth somewhat aside, and then spake he to the landgrave, and said unto
him: “Most noble landgrave, look upon this painting, so marvellous well
done and with fair colours, and behold here in this corner he that was
first lord of Hessen and earl of the land. And here perceive ye one that
was an earl of Rome thereunto, and he had a princess and a wife, who was
duchess of Bavaria and a daughter of the mild and good Justinian, who
afterwards became emperor. And look ye, noble lord; of them was born
Adolphus. And of Adolphus came William the Swart; and this William had a
son Ludwig, who was named the Pious; and so forward until that we come
down unto your lordship’s grace. And I know well that there is no person
living that can reprove my work, so curiously have I made it, and with
such fair and goodly colours.” Yet saw the lord nought before his face
but the white wall, and he thought unto himself: “Though I see nothing
but the wall, yet will I say nought unto the master, else will he know
full well that I am not nobly born, but basely and vilely.” Therefore
said the landgrave unto Owlglass: “Learned and cunning master painter,
your work pleaseth me marvellously well, yet is my understanding very
small therein.” Therefore departed he out of the hall.

And when that he did come unto the princess his wife, she spake unto
him, and asked him, saying: “How goeth it with the master painter? Ye
have seen his work and devices, and how are ye pleased therewith? Truly
have I but small belief in him; for he seemeth unto me a rare and most
cunning knave and beguiler.” And the landgrave answered her: “I have
shrewd trust in him; and therein is displayed great cunning and mastery:
I like it well. Would it please thee also to look thereon?” And she
said: “Yea, that it would.” And the landgrave said: “Then, with the
master’s consent, shall ye do it.” Then sent she for Owlglass, and said
unto him, that she did desire to behold his painting. And that did
Owlglass grant unto her; but he told her likewise the marvellous secret
which did hang upon his painting. And they entered in, and with the
princess came eight maidens of her women and her woman-fool, which did
everywhere be in her company. And Owlglass put back the cloth with his
hand, and with his wand told them the same story which he had told unto
the landgrave. Yet perceived they nothing; but being ashamed, spake not
any word, neither praising nor blaming the picture. But then did the
woman-fool open her mouth, and spake, and said unto Owlglass:
“Worshipful master, an if it be that I am basely born, yet see I nothing
of thy device upon the wall.” And Owlglass thought: “Now goeth the
matter not so rarely on as before; for if the fools speak truth, then
truly must I depart hence:” and laughed thereat within himself.

Thereafter departed the princess, and went unto her lord and husband,
and he spake unto her, and asked her how that the work liked[10] her.
And she answered and said: “Most gracious lord, it liketh me as well as
it did you, and truly is most rare. But my woman-fool it liketh not; and
she saith that she cannot see any painting there at all. And she and my
maidens think that there lieth hid some knavish practice therein.”
Thereat began the landgrave to take counsel within himself, if it might
be that he was beguiled; but he sent word unto Owlglass that he should
make ready his work, for that all his court was coming to behold the
picture, and that if any among them fortuned to be base-born, then
should their lands be escheated unto the landgrave. Thereat gat him
Owlglass unto his fellows and discharged them, and gave them money, and
they departed. And then went he unto the treasurer, and of him gat he
other hundred marks; and then went he forth from the castle, and so
departed on his way.

And it came to pass that on the morrow the landgrave demanded where that
his painter might be—but he had departed. Thereat went he with all his
lords into the hall where that the master had exercised his cunning
device, but there saw they no painting; so they spake no words, but kept
their mouths shut. Thereat said the landgrave, for he beheld the sign
which Owlglass did always write where that he had worked any knavery,
which was that he wrote up the device of an owl and a glass: “Now do we
know that we are beguiled; and with Owlglass have we but little for to
be moved, but rather for the two hundred marks, but the loss thereof can
we likewise bear. But a great knave is he, and must henceforth remain
far from our lands.”

Thus did our noble Master Owlglass everywhere teach wisdom unto the
lieges; but from Marburg had he gat him forth, nor would he again have
to do with the painter’s mastery.

-----

Footnote 10:

  _i.e._ Pleased.




                    The Twenty and Ninth Adventure.

    _How that Owlglass was for little money well entertained of two
                              innkeepers._


It fortuned that in a village were there two innkeepers, who did with
great hatred pursue each other, and they could not bear to live in
friendship, or as neighbours should. And if it came to pass, that the
one did have in his house more custom than the other, then was there
much anger and envy therefrom, and they grew ever more enemies
thereafter.

On a time it came to pass, that Owlglass came thither, although thereby
he ran great danger. And he entered into the house of one of these
twain, and he spake unto the host, and asked of him, whether for twelve
pennies he might have wine? “Yea,” answered the host, “that he might in
good truth;” and went and brought him speedily a measure of wine.
Thereafter asked Owlglass again, whether he might for twelve pennies
have beef and salad? “Yea,” said the host; and brought beef and salad,
the which did Owlglass eat with rare enjoyment. And as he was eating,
the cook carried a fowl by on a plate, and Owlglass saw it, and he
called for the host, and asked him, if for twelve pennies he might have
a part thereof? “Most truly,” said the host. And behold his measure of
wine was empty, and Owlglass moreover called the host unto him, and
said: “Can I for twelve pennies again have wine?” “Yea,” answered the
host, and rejoiced in his good visitor, and brought him a fresh measure
of wine. And Owlglass was full and fairly provisioned within, and he
prepared to depart, and rose up, and he laid twelve pennies on the
table, and then he would have departed out of the door. Thereat the host
held him back, and said unto him, that the money was not enough, and
that he must pay four times as much. “What mean ye?” said Owlglass. “Did
not I ask ye every time, if that I might have for twelve pennies that
which I required? And now would ye have much more? How mean ye? There is
my debt, and is it to be laid unto my charges that ye have not
understood me?” Then saw the host that it was most plain he had been
beguiled; and he spake unto Owlglass, that he would forgive him the debt
and add thereto the present of a piece of money, if that he would go
unto his neighbour hard by and there work the same thing. Then Owlglass
put the piece of money in his doublet, and laughed, and said unto the
host: “Verily have I already done thus at your neighbour’s house, and he
it was that did give me a piece of money an if I would but come to you.”
And therewith departed our well beloved brother Owlglass, and the host
marvelled with great marvel.




                        The Thirtieth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did tell his master how he might scape giving pork
                         unto his neighbours._


On a time Owlglass was servant unto a boor, who was a man of great
avarice, and did never like to give unto others anything he might have.
Now it fortuned that he killed a pig, and as he had received from others
pieces of bacon when that they killed, so now would they expect that he
would give unto them in return. Then he spake unto Owlglass, saying:
“Truly art thou of a quick wit and ready invention. Tell me how shall I
escape giving unto my neighbours.” Thereat said Owlglass: “In truth,
nothing is more easy. Behold, when it is night-time hang thy pig without
thy door upon a hook, and when that it cometh unto midnight take it
secretly away, and make great complaint that it hath been stolen.” And
the boor did according unto the words of Owlglass, for he was content.

When that he came in the night to take his pig secretly away, he found
it not, and did cry out woundily that robbers had taken it. And truly
our good Master Owlglass had conveyed the pig away himself. And when he
heard the boor cry, he came up to him, and asked what might have
happened. And the boor answered Owlglass, and said: “The thieves have
come and taken away my pig.” Then answered Owlglass: “Excellently spake!
So tell thou unto all thy neighbours.” But the other said: “Nay; but the
matter hath not ended as I desired. The pig hath truly been stolen.” And
Owlglass answered him: “An if ye speak thus well, all the town will
believe you. Most excellent, by my halidom!” And although the boor would
have persuaded Owlglass of the truth, did that great master only laugh.
And thereafter did he tell unto the neighbours what he had advised; and
no one would believe the boor.




                    The Thirty and First Adventure.

    _How that Owlglass conferred with the rector and masters of the
 University of Prague in Bohemia, and how he did make answer unto their
             questions, and therein came off most wisely._


And Owlglass departed and came unto the city of Prague in Bohemia, and
there he set letters upon the church-doors, and therein said unto all
that might read, that of a truth was he a most famous master, and one
that could make answer unto all questions. And the rector and masters of
the university heard that this learned man had come; and they were
troubled thereat, and they took counsel how that they might put such
questions unto him as he could not resolve, and thus might they cause
him to be cast forth from the town with much mockery and shame. And so
did they agree. And they sent the bedell of the university unto the inn
where Owlglass lay, and charged the host that he should bring his guest
into the chamber of the rector and masters; and he promised to do this
thing. And they charged Owlglass that the next day he should give
answers unto the questions which they had writ down, and if he could not
answer, then should he be declared unworthy. And Owlglass answered, and
said: “Tell the most learned rector and masters that I will do it
straightway as they do require of me; and I trust to prove myself a
pious man as from old time have I done.”

And on the next day the rector and masters and students of the
university assembled together, and Owlglass came with his host and some
few of the citizens, so that all might proceed with good content. And
when that he had entered into the assembly, they signified unto him that
he should stand upon the stool, and make reply unto the questions so
demanded of him. Then the rector opened his mouth, and spake unto
Owlglass, and asked him, how many gallons of water there were in the
sea; and he charged him to speak the truth and to conceal nothing from
him, for an if he could not answer, then would he punish him as an
ignorant beguiler, and cast him forth. And Owlglass thereupon answered
him and said: “Four hundred and eighty million seven hundred and thirty
thousand two hundred and sixty-four gallons and two-thirds of good
measure. An ye will not believe what I say, cause ye the rivers and
lakes and streams which run therein to stand still, and I will mete it,
and if it prove not as I say, then will I confess that I am unwise.” And
the rector could not do this thing, and therefore he was obliged to
admit the answer of Owlglass; and he next asked him this following
question: “Tell me how many days have passed by from Adam’s time until
this present hour?” And Owlglass spake unto him, saying: “Most
worshipful master rector, the number is not great; only seven have so
passed—Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday; and when that they have passed, then begin other seven days,
and so will it go forward until the end of the world.” Then said the
rector: “Now answer me exactly, and say where is the middle of the
world?” Then Owlglass answered: “That is here where we now stand; and if
ye believe me not, do ye take a cord and mete it, and if it be a hair’s
breadth less, then will I stand ashamed.” Then the rector waxed wroth,
and asked Owlglass the fourth question: “How far is it from earth to
heaven?” And Owlglass made answer: “When that one speaketh in heaven it
is easy to hear it down here; therefore get ye one of ye up thither, and
I will cry aloud, and if ye hear me not, then will I confess my wrong.”
And the rector waxed tired of questioning Owlglass, and asked him: “How
great was heaven?” And Owlglass said unto him: “It is a thousand fathoms
wide, and a thousand cubits high; and if ye believe me not, take the sun
and moon and stars from heaven, and mete it, and ye will find I am right
therein.”

And, my masters, I charge ye to tell me, what could the worthy folks
answer unto Owlglass? In all things was he too cunning for them; and by
knavery had he beguiled them all. Then did he strip off his long coat,
and departed from Prague.




                    The Thirty and Second Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did on a time mix him up in a marriage strife, and
                  did soon end it with great renown._


It came to pass on a time, that Owlglass entered into a town where much
wine was made, and where the folk of the town did oftentimes drink
themselves drunken thereupon. And, my masters, well do you know that
when on a time ye have peeped into the glass, so that ye have been not
as it would like me an if ye always were; and after that ye come home,
ye do not find that your wives receive ye in so goodly and excellent a
wise as at other times, so happened it that our noble and beloved Master
Owlglass, as he was passing along the street to get him to the inn where
he lay, did hear a brawling within a house hard by, as of people
disputing the one with the other in great anger. So our good friend
therewith stood still, and he hearkened, and perceived that it was the
wife of a cobbler who, unto her husband, the which had come back from
the winehouse well drunken, was reading the evening blessing, the which
doeth such great and excellent good unto all husbands. And with many
words contended they until that it was supper time; then the husband
took his wife by the head, and said unto her: “Wilt thou cook for me my
supper?” And she said: “Nay, that would she not,” and then went they to
quarreling again with much contention. At last said the cobbler: “I
would have that the devil should come and fly away with thee!” And when
that Owlglass heard these words, he took up a large stone which lay in
the street, and threw it at the window, so that the frame and glass all
fell together, and brake with a loud noise. And the twain who were
contending within, thought in truth that the devil had come thither, and
were stricken with great terror. But Owlglass gat him away, for that he
might not have the charges of the broken window demanded of him. Yet
went the story forth with great renown, and even unto this day do the
town folk believe that the devil appeared in shape like unto a great
stone; and if that ye believe not my saying, get ye thither and ask it
of them yourselves.




                    The Thirty and Third Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did cause an ass to read certain words out of a book
                  at the great university of Erfurt._


Now after that Owlglass had departed, and had gat him away, it came to
pass that he journeyed until he entered the city of Erfurt, at the which
place is a most learned university. And our well-beloved Master
Owlglass, like unto some wise men of our days, could not hide his wisdom
under a bushel; but wheresoever it fortuned for him to sojourn, there
must he teach the people some cunning thing. And after that he had come
unto Erfurt, he gat him unto a notary, and with fine writing had he
letters marvellously done in goodly and fair manuscript, setting forth
therein his wondrous parts. And such letters of challenge he set upon
the church doors. And the great fame of Owlglass had come unto Erfurt,
where the rector and learned doctors had heard not a little of his
knavish beguilings and conceits; thereat conferred they together as to
how they might so enjoin him to do a thing the which he might not be
able to perform, but have great shame thereby, and that they themselves
might not be deceived and mocked. And then they agreed that they would
give unto Owlglass an ass to be his scholar, the which he should teach
that he might in time become a reader and a wise beast, for of asses
were there great plenty in that university.

[Illustration]

Thereat went they unto Owlglass, and they spake unto him, saying:
“Worshipful master, well know we that you have set letters of art upon
the doors of the church, by the which ye say ye can teach unto any
beast, both that he shall learn to write and to read; now, therefore,
have the doctors of the university resolved, in that among us be no lack
of asses, that ye shall receive one to be a scholar and student under
thee, and that he shall learn to read. Will ye have him to be a scholar,
and receive him and therewith, when that ye have taught him, a great
reward?” Then answered Owlglass and said: “Yea, that will I; but
thereunto must I have time, for an ass is an animal not wise nor easy to
be taught.” So they conferred together, and agreed that he was to be
allowed twenty years in the which to teach him. Then thought Owlglass in
his own mind: “So there are three of us unto this bargain. If that the
rector should die, then am I free. And if it should come to pass that I
should die, then can I break the contract. But if my scholar should not
live, then am I also quit.” And he agreed with them, and of the money he
received some in part. Then he gat him into the inn of the town, and the
master of the house was a man of singular mind. And for his scholar did
Owlglass hire him a stable, and he gat him a great old book, and laid it
into the manger before him, and between each leaf of the book he laid
oats, and the ass soon beheld that, and he turned over the leaves with
his tongue to eat the oats, and when that the oats were all gone, he
cried out with a loud voice: “E, A—E, A!”

And when that Owlglass perceived this, he rose up and gat him unto the
rector, and came into his presence, and said unto him: “Worshipful
master rector, when will it please ye to come unto me to see how my
disciple doth get forward with his book?” Then said the rector: “Doth he
agree unto that which thou teachest him?” And Owlglass answered him, and
said: “Truly he is a difficult disciple, and one that loveth not his
book; yet have I brought it about that by much labour he pronounceth two
vowel sounds very well, that is to say, E and A. Will it not make ye
pleasure to come and hear him?” And all this time had the good scholar
fasted. And when that Owlglass came with the rector, and some of the
doctors of the university, he took a book and laid it in the manger
before him, and when that the ass beheld it, he turned over the leaves
backward and forward, hither and thither, with his tongue to find the
oats, but, as he found nothing therein, he cried with a loud voice: “E,
A—E, A!” Then said Owlglass: “Behold, most learned doctors, my disciple
doth now pronounce well, although yet somewhat broadly, the two vowels E
and A, and that can he do. I have great hope of him that he will soon
get farther.” In no long time after died the rector; and then Owlglass
abode no longer with his disciple, but with his money departed, thinking
that in truth it would demand great industry to make all the asses in
Erfurt wise. Therefore he did it not; and they be all asses in that city
unto this day.




                    The Thirty and Fourth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did kill a hog, and answered for his evil doing unto
                           the burghmaster._


Now it fortuned, that Owlglass once came unto a village, and did hire
him unto a boor to be his serving man. And this boor rejoiced greatly in
all the wise sayings of Owlglass; and in no long time was Owlglass the
best man in the house. And it came to pass upon one even that the boor
made complaint unto Owlglass, and said unto him that he had an evil
neighbour who endeavoured with all his might to afflict him in all ways
that he might, and who, as the old saw saith, would have given an eye
that the boor might be blind. Then Owlglass thought within him: “That
will I soon repay with marvellous heavy interest. And so that my master
doth thereat have joy and goodly satisfaction, then shall I be content.”
And when that he entered into the farm-yard on the next morning to
depart about his labour, Owlglass beheld that the neighbour’s hog had
broken into that place, and was rolling on the dunghill in the yard; and
hard upon the dunghill was there a pond of water, which stood still, and
was covered with green. Then took Owlglass a cudgel and did strike the
hog therewith, until that the hog ran into the pool and was therein
drowned. But privily had the neighbour watched Owlglass, and beheld that
which was done; and he cried aloud, and ran unto Owlglass, and demanded
money for the hog which he had thus lost. And as Owlglass heeded him
not, he came unto his master and desired the same thing. But the master
of Owlglass said: “Truly, therewith have I nought to do. My servant man
did this thing; go ye therefore unto the burghmaster and speak thereof
unto him, and let my man answer it.” Thereat the owner of the hog gat
him unto the burghmaster, and complained unto him of what Owlglass had
done. Then the burghmaster sent for Owlglass, and spake unto him, and
demanded that he should answer it.

And Owlglass did rise up early in the morning, and he saddled a horse,
and gave him to eat, and then departed, and gat him unto the house of
the burghmaster. And the burghmaster, at that time, fortuned to be at
his breakfast, and had before him a porringer of barley broth. And the
burghmaster questioned Owlglass how that it had come to pass that he had
killed the hog. Then Owlglass answered cunningly, and told him how that
the hog brake his way into the yard and wallowed upon the dunghill; and,
moreover, he told him how he had struck the hog, that he departed into
the pool, and was there drowned. But the burghmaster was a man of slow
understanding,—as is in truth not a thing marvellous strange amid people
set in authority,—and he demanded of Owlglass that he should tell him
the story more plainly. Whereat replied Owlglass and said: “Most
worshipful sir, I will set forth unto you this thing very plain and easy
to be comprehended of you. Look you, suppose ye that ye were yourself
the hog, and your porringer of barley the pool, and suppose that I came
after this wise, and with my hand smote you thus”—and therewith fetched
Owlglass the burghmaster a great blow over the head—“thou mightest fall
therein.” Thereat cried the burghmaster aloud, and would have held
Owlglass; but he ran forth and leapt upon his horse and departed thence
with great haste.




                    The Thirty and Fifth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass at Nugenstädten, in the land of Thuringia, did wash
                           the women’s furs._


Now after that did Owlglass come into the land of Thuringia, into the
village of Nugenstädten, and there he entered and besought the inn-folk
that he should receive a night’s lodging. Thereat came the hostess unto
him, and asked him, saying: “What manner of trade followest thou?”

And Owlglass answered and said unto her: “Truly am I of no trade, but do
in all things accustom myself to speak the truth.” Then said the
hostess: “Such do I most gladly receive into my house, and
truth-speakers are welcome.” And Owlglass looked round him, and he
perceived that the hostess did squint; therefore he said: “Squint-wife,
squint-wife, where doth it please ye that I shall sit, and where would
ye have me to lay my staff and wallet?” Thereat waxed the hostess very
wroth, and said unto him: “May nought good ever happen unto thee; in all
my life did no one ever say unto me that I squinted!” But Owlglass
answered and said unto her: “Dear hostess, be not angry with me, for an
if I do speak the truth, then must I do it at all times, and in all
things.” And thereat was her wrath turned away, and she, being merry,
laughed and was content.

Now after that Owlglass had abode that night in her inn, they conferred
together, and he told her that he could wash old furs so that they
became new again. Thereat rejoiced the hostess greatly, and begged that
he would do this, and she would tell all her neighbours that they should
also bring their furs to be washed. And Owlglass said: “Yea, verily,
that would he do.” Then all the women in the village brought unto
Owlglass their furs, that they might be washed. And Owlglass said unto
them: “Ye must have milk.” And all the women desired greatly to have new
furs, and they each gat them home, and brought unto Owlglass all the
milk that they had there. And Owlglass set two cauldrons upon the fire,
and he poured the milk into them, and then put the furs into the milk,
and they were boiled therein.

And it came to pass, that when he thought that they had boiled enough,
he said unto the women: “Now must ye bring me young white elm twigs, and
peel ye them, and when that ye come again unto me, I will take out the
furs, for then will they be boiled enough, and I will wring them; yet
must I have wood to do this.” And the women departed right joyfully to
fetch the wood, and the children ran with them, and sang and danced, and
said: “O beautiful new fur cloaks! O beautiful new fur cloaks!” Then
stood Owlglass and laughed, and said: “Wait ye yet a while, the furs be
not right yet.” And while they were gone for the twigs, Owlglass piled
more wood on the fire, and left the furs boiling, and departed out of
the village. And yet hath he not returned to wash the furs. When that
the women folk came back, they began to quarrel, and strive one with the
other, for each would have her fur first forth from the cauldron; but
when that they looked how they were proceeding, lo! they were all boiled
to rags and fell to pieces. And Owlglass rejoiced that he had so happily
gone forth.




                    The Thirty and Sixth Adventure.

_Telleth how that Owlglass journeyed about the land with a saint’s head,
                    and did beguile many therewith._


Now the malice of Owlglass had been so great that everywhere was he
known, and his knavery noised abroad, so that where he once came at any
time, to that place durst he not go again, unless it mote be that he
disguised himself in strange appearance that others might not know him.
And although, with his idleness, he could never have much content, yet
from his youth up had he always been one that loved good living, and by
his divers beguilings he always had by him good store of money. But by
his knavishness he had fallen into such evil repute, that nowhere might
he get money, and he began to see the bottom of his money-pouch oftener
than it pleased him to do. So he began to consider within himself, how
that he might without labour get more money, for he knew that often more
money is gained by idle courses than by hard work. Then thought he that
he would become a pardoner, and journey to and fro with a holy relic,
therewith to persuade the people that they should give him money.
Therefore he gat him the long gown of a priest’s scholar, and went unto
the sexton, who gave unto him a skull; therewith he departed unto the
silversmith, who set it about fairly with brave workmanship in silver.
Then came he into the land of Pomerania, where have I also been, my
masters. And there are the people right honest and good, brave men and
true, believing that which ye say unto them; and their piety is as great
as their faith. Yet in that land Owlglass found that the priests cared
more for drinking than preaching; and when that a church feast, a
wedding, or any other assembly came to pass in a village, then did
Owlglass go unto the priest, and entreat of him that he might preach,
and shew unto the boors the holy relic which he bare with him; and
Owlglass promised to give unto the priest half of whatever offerings the
village folk made thereto. The unlearned priest was content enough if
that he might only receive money thereby.

And when that there were many folk in the church, Owlglass gat him up
into the pulpit, and spake somewhat to them of the old covenant and of
the new covenant, of the ark and the golden vessels where lay the holy
bread. Thereafter spake he of the head of the holy Saint Brandonus, he
that was a sanctified man, and that to his honour was it now resolved,
that a church should be builded, and that with money not got by knavery;
nor would he receive aught from any that loved not their husbands. Then
gave he the head unto the peasants to kiss, and it might have been the
head of a thief for what Owlglass knew; and after that he blessed them,
and gat him down, and went to the altar, and there began he to sing, and
ring the bells. Then came all the women, good and bad, unto him with
their offerings; and the bad came twice and thrice, and he received all,
nor turned away any. And the women believed in his saying, and thought
that one that came not should be reproved. And any woman who had no
money brought unto him a golden ring, and they strove together which
should offer more often than another, for therewith was their virtue
confirmed. And many offered so that all folks might behold it, for
charity covereth a multitude of sins. Thus did Owlglass get the fairest
offering which in that land had been offered, and all the women of the
land held Owlglass in great reverence for his piety. And Owlglass knew
how to practise malice with gain. Nor do the folks even unto this day
omit with much openness to give unto charitable uses a trifle from their
substance, and their names are written in great letters; and some that
respect charity have an awe for them, but a few there be that think ye
should work goodness in secret.




                   The Thirty and Seventh Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did make the town-watch of Nürnberg to fall into the
                  water which is called the Pegnitz._


Owlglass was most wise in knavery. And when that he had journeyed far
and wide with the holy head of Saint Brandonus, and had beguiled the
people, so that he felt it in his pocket as a heavier weight than it lay
upon his soul, he came unto Nürnberg, where he purposed to make good
cheer with the money which the head gat for him. And after that he had
lain there for a while, he could no longer live unless that he committed
some vile knavery; therefore he looked round as to what he might do.
And, behold, it came to pass that the town watchmen slept in a great
watch-box, beneath the town-hall, in their armour, and this saw
Owlglass. Now Owlglass had learned all the highways and byways at
Nürnberg, and he craftily took heed of the small bridge which is called
the Hangman’s Bridge, and which leads between the Pig-market and the
Little House, where of a night it is ill to pass; and many a one who
hath gone thereby to fetch a measure of wine, hath had too great a drink
of water. Thereafter waited Owlglass with his knavery, until the people
had begun to sleep—and truly watchmen sleep always early; and when that
it was quite still brake he craftily from the bridge three planks, and
cast them into the Pegnitz, and then departed on his way to the
town-hall, and there ’gan he to swear, and with an old knife which he
had he struck the stones of the street, that fire flew far round. Now
the watch awoke thereat, and they heard him, and gat them up, and
followed after him. So Owlglass fled before them, and ran in the way
which led to the Pig-market, and when he came unto the bridge he helped
himself diligently across as best he might where that he brake away the
planks; and after that he had come thereover, he lifted up his voice,
and cried unto them: “Ho! ho! ye shamefaced knaves! where be ye that ye
follow not?” And thereat were the watchmen angry, and they pursued him
yet faster, and each desired to be the first to catch the mocking
beguiler. Then fell they one after the other into the Pegnitz; and it
fortuned that the hole was so narrow, that they dashed their teeth out
as they fell against the other side. Then spake Owlglass unto them, and
said: “Ho! ho! come ye not forward yet? To-morrow follow after me yet
more hastily.” And one there was of them who brake his leg, and another
his arm, and the third knocked a hole in his skull; thus no one came off
without some hurt. Now, after that Owlglass had thus accomplished his
knavery, he abode no longer in the town of Nürnberg, but gat him forth,
and departed; for he was sore afraid, that, if it should be discovered,
the lords of the city of Nürnberg might cause him to suffer therefor.




                    The Thirty and Eighth Adventure.

           _How that Owlglass did at Bamberg eat for money._


On a time, did Owlglass receive money through his cunning, when that he
had departed from Nürnberg and came unto Bamberg, where that he found
that he was an hungered. And in that city of Bamberg entered he into an
inn, and the hostess thereof was a good soul and a merry, and she bade
him welcome with gay words, for by his clothes perceived she that he was
a guest of rare quality. When that the time came in the morning that
they should eat, she spake unto Owlglass, and asked him, saying:
“Whether would he sit at table to eat, or have a portion for so much
money?” And Owlglass answered, and said unto her “I am a poor man and a
needy.” Then entreated he her, that she should, for God his sake, give
unto him to eat. Thereat said the hostess: “Friend, an if I gave unto
thee to eat, I should lose thereby, for the flesher and the baker will
demand to have money of me for their wares. Therefore, for eating must I
also receive money.” Then said Owlglass: “Alas! my dear woman, to eat
for money doth also content me: tell me now how much shall I eat for?”
And the woman spake unto him, saying: “At the gentles’ table, four and
twenty pence; and the next table thereunto, for eighteen pence; and with
my serving people, twelve pence.” Then answered Owlglass unto her words,
and said: “Hostess, the table for four and twenty pence is the most, and
will best convene unto me.” Therefore sat he down to the gentles’ table,
and did eat as much as ever he could. And when that he had eaten and
drunken very heartily, he said unto the hostess, and besought her that
she would settle with him, for that by poverty it was necessary he
should depart. Then answered she unto Owlglass, saying: “Gentle guest,
an if ye give unto me twenty-four pence, ye may, in God’s name, depart
whither it please ye.” But thereat said Owlglass: “Nay, but ye should
give unto me twenty-four pence, for ye said unto me, that for four and
twenty pence should I eat; and therefore apprehended I, that ye meant to
cause that I should earn money, and most heavily did I earn it, for if
life and strength had touched the matter, then could I not have eaten
more. Therefore pray I ye, render unto me my hard earnings.” Then said
the hostess: “Friend, thou speakest truly, for thou hast eaten as much
as any three could have done; but that I should give unto thee money
cometh not within my thought. Yet, in so far as toucheth the dinner,
that will I excuse thee; go therewith in peace; but I give ye no money,
be ye assured. Nor will I demand it of ye; but come not hitherward
again, for if that I should with every guest have such, little would
come therefrom but loss to me.” Then departed Owlglass, and little
thanks gat he.




                    The Thirty and Ninth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did make a wager with a Jew about a horse, and did
                             deceive him._


In no long time thereafter came Owlglass into Mechlenburg, and there he
gat him a horse of excellent goodness. And as he would have departed on
his way thence, and rode by an inn, the horse would no longer go
forward, for it had an evil habit that at every inn would it stop.
Thereat said Owlglass: “In truth, thou canst also drink thee a measure
of liquor, for it is hot;” and therefore he gat down from the horse, and
tied him up unto the gateway. Then entered he into the inn, and the
guest-chamber thereof, and there sat several guests within, making
merry. At the table there sat a Jew, who was a dealer in horses; and the
Jew had perceived the horse of Owlglass as he came up unto the house.
And he spake unto Owlglass, saying: “Wilt thou sell thy horse, and what
wouldst thou have in money therefor?” Then Owlglass answered, and said
unto the Jew: “This horse canst thou not buy, Jew; it is a Mechlenburg
horse, and of a most rare breed, and three hundred nobles would scarce
pay for it.” Then said the Jew: “Nay, but what think ye, gracious sir,
for twenty nobles would I buy thee such a horse. Wilt thou set a wager
upon it?” “Most contemptible son of Moses,” said Owlglass, “thou couldst
not. He hath not one fault, and is as gentle as a tender lamb.” “Well,”
answered the Jew: “wilt thou take twenty nobles therefor?” Then Owlglass
spake unto him, and said: “Look you, Hebrew Jew, an if thou wilt take
three strokes from my riding-whip, then will I give thee the horse, and
he shall be fairly thine own.” Thereat said the Jew: “Ye would fain jest
with me, noble sir; may I trust your word?” And Owlglass said: “Hast
thou not heard it?” Then cried the Jew: “Yea; and the gentlefolk yonder
will be witnesses thereunto.” Then said Owlglass: “Good: when wilt thou
have the three strokes? Wilt thou have it that I begin now at this place
and time?” Thereupon the Jew answered Owlglass, and said: “An if that I
must have them, it may as well now be as at any other time.” Then
Owlglass commanded that the Jew should be tied up, and said unto him:
“Now do thou remember. Thou hast to receive from me three strokes, and
when thou hast received them, then shalt thou truly become possessor of
my horse.”

Then he took his whip, and lifted it, and came down with a great stroke
upon the back of the Jew, so that he cried aloud with marvellous pain.
Then said Owlglass: “Son of Abraham, art thou content, or wilt thou
straightway receive the next stroke?” And the Jew answered, and said:
“Gracious sir, the other will I have now; but I entreat thee, for pity’s
sake, not to strike me so sore.” And Owlglass spake unto him, and said:
“Then make thou thyself ready:” and therewith gave he unto the Jew a yet
sorer stroke. The poor Jew thereat bit his tongue woundily with the
pain, and cried to Owlglass that he should speedily give him the third
stroke. Then said Owlglass: “Nay; but for the third stroke mayest thou
stay a while, so long as thou receivest it not is the horse mine.
Behold, here are the witnesses.” Thereat, although the Jew scarce could
stand with the pain, he entreated Owlglass that he should then give him
the third stroke; but Owlglass would not. Then lamented the Jew, and
Owlglass gave unto him a measure of wine; but he ceased not to complain
in that he had been beguiled of Owlglass. Yet was the Jew justly served,
in that, with small pains and labour, he would have received the horse
of Owlglass.

O most worthy teacher of wisdom unto the ignorant and sinful, why camest
thou not in the days in which I do here chronicle thy marvellous deeds?




                        The Fortieth Adventure.

           _How Owlglass did have much money for an old hat._


Money remaineth not always with any of us, my masters; and so truly did
Owlglass find, when that he was in the town of Cologne. And he was so
poor, that of all his money he possessed only four shillings; and on his
head he wore an old hat, with three corners, and thereat did all people
laugh. Then Owlglass thought that he would therewith have rare sport and
profit. And as he was going along the street of the town, he beheld two
officers of the soldiers; and he knew that they had pouches well lined
with gold pieces. And they laughed at his hat. Then spake Owlglass unto
them: “Behold, ye do laugh at my hat. Verily will I shew unto ye that in
no wise is it to be accounted nought, but hath great virtue; and to
content you therein, I bid ye both dine with me on this day.” And the
soldiers consented, and so gat them with Owlglass. When that they came
unto the gate of the best inn, Owlglass said: “What say ye? where shall
we dine?” Then they answered and said: “Let us enter herein and dine, if
that ye have a good pouch of money?” And Owlglass said: “Be of good
cheer, that maketh no matter, let us enter therein.” Then entered they;
and Owlglass secretly conferred with the hostess, and gave her the four
shillings, therewith to satisfy her for the dinner.

And when that the dinner was served, the officers waxed merry, for it
was a very excellent dinner, and they were content. Thereafter did
Owlglass say unto the hostess: “What money dost thou want to satisfy
thee for thy dinner?” And she answered and said: “Four shillings.” “Four
shillings, sayest thou?” answered Owlglass, and therewith he took his
little hat and he turned it four times about upon his finger, and asked
her if that she were content. And she said: “Yea; and fair thanks unto
ye likewise.” And therewith departed she. But the officers, when that
they beheld it, said: “But how marvellous is this thing!” And they were
most astonished. “Alas! my masters,” said Owlglass unto them: “do not ye
now see how great is the value of the hat? With the money that more than
twenty times hath been offered me therefor, should I be rich.”

Then said one of his guests: “If that I offered unto thee a good sum,
would not ye sell it? For poor soldiers as be we, so great a marvel
would be accounted very useful unto us, for then should we never die of
hunger.” And Owlglass was persuaded, and he gave them the hat for four
hundred marks. And the next day, he who bought it desired to make trial
of it; and he went unto the inn and had a great banquet made ready, and
he assembled his friends together to eat thereof. Then when the time
came for paying the host, he sought to pay the charges by turning the
hat about; but the host understood it not. And so the soldier had to pay
many marks therefor; and when he looked after Owlglass he found him not.




                     The Forty and First Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass journeyed unto Rome to see the Pope, and how his
           Holiness considered that Owlglass was an heretic._


It hath been every where seen, that Owlglass was a most knavish wight.
And when it had come to pass that he had worked these such deceiving
actions, he thought of the old proverb which saith:

                  “If that thou a knave wouldst see,
                  At Rome eftsoon thou’lt fitted be.”

And Owlglass was aweary of his own devices, and thereat wished that he
might find another like unto him. So departed he, and he journeyed
forward, and at last came unto Rome. There entered he into an inn, which
a widow kept, and she saw that he was a goodly man to look upon, and she
spake unto him, and asked him of what country was he. And Owlglass told
her that he was of the land of Saxony, and that he had come unto Rome
because that he craved to confer with the Pope touching a certain
business. Then answered the widow and said unto him: “The Pope canst
thou see, but as to speaking with him that mayest thou not do. I have
been bred and born in this place, and of gentle birth also, yet have I
never spoken with the Pope. How then, think ye, that ye will do this
thing? Truly would I give a hundred ducats an if that I could have
speech of him.” And Owlglass answered and said: “My good hostess an if I
gat ye speech of him would ye give me the hundred ducats?” The woman
said: “Marry that would I,” and straightway promised them unto him. But
she thought that it could never be that Owlglass would do this thing;
for she knew that it was a heavy and long labour to bring it about. But
Owlglass said unto her that if he did cause it to come to pass, then
would he demand the hundred ducats; and therewith were they both
content.

And Owlglass tarried until it fortuned that the Sunday came round, on
which the Pope read the mass in the chapel called Jerusalem, in the
church of the holy Saint John Lateran, the which he did once in every
four weeks. Then gat him Owlglass to the chapel, and thrust himself in
as near as might be unto the Pope’s person, and stood there; and when
that the host was lifted up, or a blessing given from the altar, then
did Owlglass turn his back thereunto, the which was a thing not fit to
be done. And thereafter was the Pope told of this, that a very proper
handsome man had stood at the mass and so acted. Then said his Holiness
that such a thing was an abomination, and that he feared the man who had
done so was in unbelief and an heretic. If that this were not punished,
it would be a great scandal. Then sent the Pope for Owlglass, and the
messengers came unto him and carried him before the Pope. Then said the
Pope unto Owlglass: “What manner of man art thou?” And Owlglass answered
and said: “I am a good Christian.” Then said the Pope: “What belief hast
thou?” To which Owlglass made reply: “That he was of the same belief as
his hostess,” and named her by name, and she was a woman well-known. And
the Pope commanded that she should be brought to him; and he asked her,
saying: “What belief hast thou, woman?” And she made answer unto the
Pope and said: “I am a thorough Christian, and a believer in that which
the Holy Church ordaineth is to be believed, and no other belief have
I.” In the which the good woman did marvellously resemble divers other
excellent Christians, which take from the mouth of ignorance the
confirming grace of wisdom.

Then stood Owlglass by, and with much humility, did seem to be very
pious, and said: “Most gracious Father! this true faith hold I also, and
that most firmly, and am a good Christian man.” Then said the Pope unto
him: “Wherefore dost thou turn thy back to the altar?” And Owlglass
answered and said: “That did I, forasmuch as I am a grievous sinner, and
one not worthy to behold the altar, as I have not received absolution
for my crimes.” Thereat was the Pope content, and giving him absolution,
he let Owlglass go; and he returned unto his inn, and demanded the
hundred ducats, the which the widow gave unto him. Yet found not
Owlglass the knave he sought, and himself was not a whit more honest
than before; so that his Roman journey did him no great good.

[Illustration: HOW OWLGLASS MAKETH THE COCK THE SECURITY FOR THE HENS.]




                    The Forty and Second Adventure.

_How that Owlglass without money bought poultry at Quedlingburg, and for
            security gave unto the farmer’s wife the cock._


In all things of old time were the people not so knavish as is now the
case, especially they that are of the boors. On a time came Owlglass
unto Quedlingburg, while that it was the weekly market day therein. And
Owlglass had little provision; for when that it happened that he had
money, in like manner that he wan it, it departed from him again. So he
took counsel within himself, how that he might have good provision. And
there sate upon the market a woman, and before her had she a large
basket of live poultry, all hens; and among them was a cock. And
Owlglass spake unto her saying: “How much wilt thou have for thy
poultry?” And the woman made answer unto him, and said: “Truly mayest
thou have them for a couple of St. Stephen’s pennies.” Then said
Owlglass: “Wilt thou not give them cheaper?” But the woman said unto
him: “Nay”; and then took Owlglass the basket, and departed therewith
unto the town gate. Thereat ran the woman after him, and said unto him:
“Merchant, how shall I understand thee? Wilt thou not pay me for the
poultry?” Then said Owlglass: “Yea, most cheerily. I am the secretary of
my lord’s lady.” “That ask I not,” said the woman; “it brooks not me
what noble people thou mayest serve. If that thou wilt have the poultry,
then do thou pay me therefor, and with my lord or my lady have I nought
to do. My father taught me that with noble folk should I nor buy nor
sell, nor lend nor borrow. Therefore pay thou me that which I demand
from thee. Dost hear me?” And Owlglass said unto the woman: “Woman, thou
art of little faith; if that all folk were like unto thee, the rich
needy would not long have their needs answered. But so that ye may,
indeed, have surety, give I ye the cock, the which will I fetch when
that I bring ye the money and the basket.” Then took the good woman the
cock, and bethought her that of a truth was she rarely secured to
receive her money. But in all vain hopes can there be no happiness; for
Owlglass returned not again, nor had she satisfaction in any wise. And
unto such as make themselves so greatly sure, is it given to be
disappointed, wherefore when that Owlglass approacheth unto ye, do ye
straightway deliver up unto him that which he demandeth, lest with wily
ways he doth beguile ye of much more. And Owlglass thereafter departed
thence, and the good wife still kept her security.




                     The Forty and Third Adventure.

_How that Owlglass, with a knavish confession, did beguile the priest at
                       Riesenburg of his horse._


Never was Owlglass unready to commit a vile piece of knavery, when that
there was opportunity thereunto. Now there abode at Riesenburg the
priest thereof, and he had a maid serving-woman, who was of a comely
countenance, and thereto also a horse of much beauty, of the which he
was greatly fond. And at that time was the Duke of Brunswick at
Riesenburg, and had, by the agency of many persons, besought the priest
that he should let him have the horse, and for him would he pay many
more times than the value. But the priest at all times denied the prince
the favour, nor would in any wise grant him his desire, for he loved his
horse, and with violence might the horse not be taken.

And it came to pass, that this thing was told unto Owlglass, and he
understood it well; and he went unto the duke, and said unto him:
“Gracious lord, what wilt thou give unto me if that I bring unto thee
the priest his horse?” “If that thou canst do it,” answered the duke,
“will I give unto thee the coat which now I wear.” And the coat was of
red satin, set and broidered with pearls. And Owlglass accepted this,
and gat him away, and departed from Wolfenbüttel unto the village of
Riesenburg, and there entered into the priest’s house; for they were
well known the twain each to each, for of old times had Owlglass abode
with him and been welcome. And after that he had been there some three
days, he did bear himself in such wise, that he seemed to be sick unto
the death; and he laid himself down, and prepared for his end. And the
priest and his serving-maid were greatly vexed thereat, and grieved over
him. Thereafter grew Owlglass so ill, that the priest said unto him,
that, in truth, for his soul’s comfort, it was meet and fit that he
should make confession. And Owlglass grew mightily inclined thereunto,
but he begged the priest that he should make inquiry of him most
acutely. Then said the priest unto him, that he should discover his soul
unto him, and confess, for that in his lifetime had he wrought much
evil. And Owlglass made answer, that in his lifetime had he only done
one thing evil the which he regretted, and that would he not confess
unto him; but if they brought unto him another priest, then would he
confess, for he was afraid that the priest might be wroth with him.

Now when that the priest heard this thing, he thought that truly was
there somewhat hidden under the words of Owlglass, the which he craved
much to know; for priests are greatly more inquisitive than other men.
Therefore he opened his mouth, and said unto Owlglass: “Dear Owlglass,
the distance is great, and it would take me a long time to find another
priest; and if that ye did give up the ghost while that I sought thee
such an one, both thou and I would have a heavy sin to answer. Therefore
be not afraid, and confess unto me thy sin; and so heavy also it be,
will I absolve thee. An if I should grow angry thereover, what doth that
matter unto thee, for thy confession may I not tell unto another?” Then
answered Owlglass, and said unto him: “Verily, then will I confess unto
thee, for the sin is not so heavy that I may not tell it; but only I
feared thee, for it concerneth thyself.” Thereat waxed the priest the
more anxious to hear what Owlglass said, and he opened his ears to hear
him, and said unto him, that if he had stolen aught from him, or wrought
him any evil, let him only confess, and he would give him content, nor
visit it upon him in any wise. Then said Owlglass unto him: “Alas!
reverend sir, well know I that ye will be an angered with me. Yet I feel
that soon shall I depart out of this world, and, therefore, must I
relieve my soul of this confession. And of that which I did, most
reverend sir, must ye shrive me. For I have in thy church kissed thy
servant woman, the which I know to be an offence of much gravity against
the Church, and against all dignity likewise.” Thereat asked the priest
of Owlglass, how often that it might have happened. And Owlglass
answered, and said: “But five times.” Then did the priest give unto
Owlglass absolution; and he took a stick and departed unto the serving
woman, and told her that which Owlglass said. But she answered that it
was not so. But the priest said unto her, that Owlglass had confessed it
unto him. Thereat said she: “Nay,” and he: “Yea”; and with no more ado,
took her and gave unto her a sound beating, until that she was black and
blue all over. The while lay Owlglass in bed, and laughed, and thought:
“Bravely doth thy purpose go forward, and ere long will thy harvest
season approach.”

And he lay still all that night, and when that it was morning he arose,
and said: “Now am I whole, and well will it be if I depart unto another
country. What have I to pay thee?” And the priest was right glad to be
ridden of his guest, and he took his money, when that they reckoned. And
the woman-servant was glad also. Then said Owlglass unto the priest:
“Wherefore hast thou revealed to another my confession? Truly will I now
go unto Halberstadt before my lord the Bishop, and lay a complaint
against thee, for that thou hast been unfaithful in thy office.” Then
did the priest tremble, and think how he might content Owlglass that he
should not complain; and he entreated him and asked what he should give
him to be silent thereupon, and would he have twenty pieces to say no
word more? But Owlglass said: “An if ye gave unto me one hundred pieces,
would I not do this, and verily will I straightway depart thither.” And
the priest humbly, and with tears, besought him to refrain, and that he
would give him whatever he would have. Thereat said Owlglass: “Give then
unto me thy horse, and I will say no more; but the horse will I have.”
But the priest loved his beast, and desired not to give it away, and he
would rather have given unto Owlglass every penny that he had; but
Owlglass demanded that he should have the horse, and would hear no word.
So the priest gave unto Owlglass the horse, and he departed therewith,
and he came unto Wolfenbüttel, and there upon the bridge stood the duke,
and beheld the coming of Owlglass. Then took the duke the coat from off
his back and gave it unto him, and received the horse. And the duke
rejoiced greatly over Owlglass his cunning in beguiling the priest, and
made pleasant sport with the tale; and he gave unto our noble Master
Owlglass another horse; and the priest was wroth at losing his horse,
and he often did comfort himself by beating the maid sorely, until that
she departed from him. So lost the priest both horse and maid.




                    The Forty and Fourth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did hire him to a smith, and what he did while with
                                 him._


And it fortuned that on a time came Owlglass unto Rostock, in the land
of Mechlenburg, and hired him unto a smith there. The smith had a
favourite saying, when that he would have the bellows blown: “Ha! ho!
follow ye with the bellows!” Then stood Owlglass and blew, and the smith
spake unto him, saying: “Ha! ho! follow ye with the bellows!” And he gat
him into the court thereafter. Then came Owlglass behind him with the
bellows on his back, and laid it down beside him, and said: “Master,
behold I have done thy bidding! Where would you have me to put it?” Then
the master looked upon him and beheld what he had done, and said: “My
good man! so did I not mean it. Go thou in again and put it back where
it stood.” And Owlglass did as his master bade him, and placed it again
where it had been before. But the master thought within himself how he
might pay him handsomely for this knavery; and he resolved that for five
days he would rise every night at midnight to begin labour in the forge.
And he wakened all his men, and they began to labour. Then said Owlglass
his comrade unto him: “What is this thing that now we labour at
midnight? Wherefore is it; of old did our master not this thing?” And
Owlglass said: “Wilt thou that I shall ask of him wherefore it is?” And
his fellow said: “Yea;” and then Owlglass asked him. And the smith made
answer unto him, and said: “It is my rule that at first my men shall
not, for eight days, lie on my bed more than half the night.” And
Owlglass held his peace, and his companion dared not to speak.

[Illustration]

And it came to pass the next night that Owlglass and his fellow were
again awakened by the master; and the other man went down and fell to
work. Then took up Owlglass the bed, and, with cords, bound it upon his
back, and when that the iron was hot, he cometh down unto the forge, and
taketh a hammer, and beginneth to smite the iron, so that the sparks
flew into the bed and burned holes therein. Thereat said the smith:
“What is’t thou dost? Why didst not thou leave the bed lying in that
place where that it should lie?” Then answered Owlglass and spake unto
the smith, saying: “Master, be not angry; my rule is it that half the
night will I lie upon the bed, and the other half shall it lie upon me.”
Then the master waxed wroth, and said unto Owlglass: “Go thou lay the
bed where thou tookest it from;” and furthermore said he: “Marry, thou
knave, get thee up out of my house, and may I never see thee more, for
evil is the day in which I beheld thee.” And Owlglass said “Yea,” unto
the master’s commands, and he went and laid back the bed upon its place.
Then gat he a ladder, and climbed up into the garret, and he broke
through the roof, and mounted up and drew the ladder after him, and so
gat him up out of the house as his master told him, and thereafter
descended he unto the street, and left the ladder, and so departed. And
the smith heard the noise that he made, and ran up stairs, and lo! there
was a great hole in the roof.

Then grew he yet more angry, and sought his pike, and departed in haste,
and ran after Owlglass. But the other man held him, and said: “Nay,
master, do not this thing, for behold, he did but that which thou didst
command him. Thou didst say: ‘Get thee _up_ out of my house,’ and that
hath he done, for he hath departed through this hole in the roof.” And
the smith was persuaded; and was not that the best thing? What booted it
unto him; he could not longer lay hands upon Owlglass, for he had
departed thence. So he fell to mending his roof, and the fellow of
Owlglass said: “With such comrades, can but little be won. And he that
knoweth not Owlglass, let him only have to do with him, he shall surely
know him well in no long time.”




                     The Forty and Fifth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass did cause all the tools, hammers, and tongs of a
                   smith to be as one mass of iron._


Now when that Owlglass departed away from the smith, it came near unto
the winter season, and the weather was very cold. And it did freeze
hard, and all things soever waxed very dear, and at great price could
you alone get victual, so that serving-men went with scant lining to
their stomachs. Like unto many others, Owlglass was without money in his
pouch, and he came unto a village, where was another smith. Now Owlglass
craved not again to become a smith’s man; but great hunger and thirst
and cold drave him thereto, and merciless masters be they. So went he
unto the smith, but the smith would have none of him, by reason of
little work which there was; yet did Owlglass beseech him, so that at
last the smith took him. And Owlglass promised that he would eat
whatever that the smith set before him. Now the smith was a knave, and
thought in himself, he shall not eat me until that I am poor.

And it came to pass in the morning, that they fell to labour, and
laboured very hard until that it was dinner time. Then took the smith
Owlglass, and led him unto the court unto the lime-pit, and he said unto
him: “Thou didst promise to eat that which I set before thee. Now take,
eat, and make thee good cheer.” But he departed into the house, and ate
roast and boiled. Then Owlglass abode without, and thought within
himself: “Unto many hast thou wrought great knaveries, thou art repaid
in that coin which thou didst pass to others. Yet shall master smith
dearly pay for this deceitful practise.” And after the dinner hour did
Owlglass return in silence unto his labour, and said nought at all, and
so went it until supper time. Then had the smith pity for Owlglass, and
gave unto him some supper, and said unto him: “Rise ye up early in the
morning, and do ye begin in good time. Then shall ye knock together what
ye shall find, and make me a round number of horse nails. The maid may
stand at the bellows until that I come unto thee.” Then did Owlglass go
to rest, and when that it was morning he rose up early, and thought:
“Now shall he pay for the dinner.” So he took the tongs and hammers,
fire-irons, sand-ladles, and everything that he could find, which was of
iron, and hammered it into one mass in the fire. The same did he with
the horse-nails; and when that he heard the master coming, departed he.

And when that the smith came in and found the pretty business, he waxed
wroth, and asked the maid how it came that this was so, and where might
his man be? And the maid answered and said: “He hath gone forth without
the door.” The smith said: “Like unto a knave hath he gone; and if that
I wist whither that he went, I would beat him with heavy stripes.” Then
said the maid: “Before he departed, he wrote somewhat over the door.”
Then went the smith and beheld that Owlglass had, as his fashion was,
painted over the door an owl and a glass, the which signified his name.
Then knew the smith thereby who his man had been, and was glad that
Owlglass had done him no worse knavery than that he had practised. But
Owlglass returned not again unto that village, or that master. And the
smith had heavy work to make his tools again as they should be.




                     The Forty and Sixth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass did speak a word of truth unto a smith, his wife,
               man, and maid, each one before the house._


Unto Wismar came Owlglass upon a holy day, and when he passed by over
against the smithy, he then beheld before the smithy door a good wife
standing dressed in her best clothes, and with her was her maid, and she
was the smith’s wife. And Owlglass went and lay at the inn opposite that
night, and in the night time he brake from off his horse’s feet all his
shoes, and the next day went over unto the smithy. On this wise came he
to know them. And when that he approached unto the smithy, lo! they
perceived that he was Owlglass; and the good wife, and her maid, came
forth before the house door, so that they might behold that which
Owlglass said and did. And Owlglass lifted up his voice, and spake unto
the smith saying: “Wilt thou now shoe these my horse’s feet?” And the
smith answered him “Yea”; and it pleased the smith that he should talk
with so wonderful a man as was Owlglass. After that they had talked and
conferred together awhile, the smith said unto him: “Behold now, if that
thou canst unto me say a word of truth, then will I give unto thee a
shoe therefor.” And Owlglass answered: “Yea”; and thus spake unto him:

               “An if hammer and iron and coals have ye,
               And wind enow in the bellows free,
               Brave smith of might then can ye be.”

Then said the smith: “That word is truth,” and gave unto him a shoe.
Then did the apprentice put the shoe on the horse’s foot; and he spake
unto Owlglass and said: “That an if Owlglass would say unto him also
such a word of verity, he would likewise bestow upon him a shoe.” Then
answered Owlglass: “Yea”; and said unto him:

                  “The master and the man they two,
                  If that work they fain would do,
                  Hard labour should they never rue.”

“True is thy saying,” answered the smith’s man, and gave him a shoe.
Thereat marvelled the good wife, and her maid; and they came unto him,
and conferred with him, and the good wife said unto him: “That an if he
said also to her words of true meaning, she would give unto him a shoe.”
And thereat answered Owlglass, and said: “Yea”; and spake thus:

               “Good wife, good wife, eye that’s bright,
               Sparkling with such knavish light,
               Loves a trysting place at night.”

Then said the good wife: “Marry but thou sayest truth,” and therewith
gave him a shoe. Then would the maid fain have a true word also spoken
unto her; and if that Owlglass did it, she would give him a shoe. And he
said:

                   “When that thou dost dine on veal,
                   Eat with care, or thou shalt feel
                   Tooth-ache pangs thee over-steal.”

And the maid said thereat: “O and alas! how true is that saying,” and
gave him a shoe. Then departed Owlglass from that place with his horse
well shod. But if any of us, my masters, went unto a blacksmith, I fear
me greatly we should have no satisfaction, or horseshoes, for telling
truths unto him. This sheweth that of old time were the people wiser
than now.




                    The Forty and Seventh Adventure.

_How that Owlglass, at Frankfort-on-the-Main, did with guile delude two
                            Jews of rings._


On a time came Owlglass unto the city of Frankfort-on-the-Main, and it
was yearly market day when that he entered therein. And in that town
dwelt many Jews, and those that dwelt not there, dwelt in other places;
and some have come out thence, and go not thither again. Then did
Owlglass send for two rich Jews, and he spake unto them, saying: “That
he would have two pair of ear-rings of them, beset with precious stones;
but they must all be of one pattern and size, nor one in the least
larger or smaller than the other.” And it was for a noble lady that he
said he would have them. Then the Jews brought a great number of costly
rings, and Owlglass dealt with each alone, and of each did he have a
pair. But unto the first he gave back a ring, and said: “That he should
take it unto the goldsmith and have it made a little larger.” And this
the Jew agreed should be done, and departed with the ring, and promised
that he would return ere long; but he left the other ring with Owlglass.
And Owlglass did likewise with the second Jew, and kept one of the twain
rings. And the Jews departed each alone. Then had Owlglass wan him a
pair of ear-rings, and therewith did he go forth from Frankfort, and
came not again. But the Jews were beguiled; yet cared not Owlglass a jot
therefor.




                    The Forty and Eighth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass served a shoemaker, and how that he inquired of him
what shapes he should cut; and the master answered him, and said: “Great
  and small, as the herdsman driveth forth to field.” Therefore cut he
                 oxen, cows, calves, sheep, and pigs._


Now in a place where Owlglass sojourned on a time, was there a
shoemaker, who loved rather to walk about in the market than to labour,
and he hired Owlglass for his servant, and he bade Owlglass cut out the
shapes himself. Then said Owlglass unto him: “Master, what would you
have me to cut?” And the shoemaker answered him, and said: “Cut ye out
great and small, as the herdsman driveth forth to field.” And Owlglass
spake unto him, and said: “Yea, master, that will I.” And therewith
departed the master unto the market. Then fell Owlglass to work, and
began to cut out pigs, and oxen, and calves, and sheep, and goats, and
all kind of cattle. When that it was night, the master returned him home
again, and fain would see what his serving-man had done; then found he
these animals cut out of the leather. Thereat grew he angry, and said
unto Owlglass: “What is it that thou hast done, so to cut and destroy my
leather?” And Owlglass said: “Dear master, I have done it as thou
wouldst most desire it should be.” The master answered, and said: “Nay,
thou liest; I would not have thee to destroy the leather; that did I not
command thee that thou shouldst do.” Then answered Owlglass to him:
“Master, wherefore be ye angry? Ye commanded me that I should cut the
leather great and small, like as the herdsman driveth forth to field;
and most truly to be seen is it that I have thus done.” Then said the
master: “Nay, but I meant ye should cut out shoes great and small.”
Thereupon said Owlglass: “Had ye said that unto me so that I understood
it, then would I have done it with great joy; and yet would I do it.”
Then agreed Owlglass and his master, the one with the other; and he
forgave him the leather he had cut up, for Owlglass promised him that he
would do him content thereafter, and as he told him that would he do.

Then did the shoemaker cut a number of soles for shoes, and laid them
before Owlglass, and said unto him: “Look ye, sew ye them little and
great as they be altogether.” And Owlglass said: “Yea” thereunto, and
began to sew them. Then tarried the master awhile, and departed not
forth, for he desired to see how Owlglass did sew. For well knew he that
which he had told him, and he craved to behold how he would do according
to his words. And Owlglass took a small shoe and a great shoe, and with
his needle and thread he sewed them together. And thereat stole the
master secretly up to him, and he perceived that which he did. Then said
he unto Owlglass: “Thou art truly a man after mine own heart; thou doest
that which I desire thee to do.” And Owlglass answered, and said unto
him: “He that doeth his master’s bidding will receive no stripes.” Then
said the master: “Yea, my good servant, my words were so, but my meaning
was other. What I meaned was, that thou shouldst first make a pair of
small shoes, and then make a pair of large, or the great first and the
small ones after; but thou sewest them altogether, according to my words
and not my meaning.” And then waxed he wroth, and took the leather which
was cut up, and said: “Now take thee other leather, and cut me new shoes
on one last.”

Thereafter thought he no more about the matter, and departed forth to
walk. And when that he had been out for more than an hour, he remembered
him that he had told Owlglass to cut all on one last; and he hastened
him home to see what was done. And Owlglass had sate him still the
while, and taken a small last, and cut all the shoes thereunto. So that
when the master came, he found he had cut it all according to the little
last; and he said unto him: “What dost thou mean, that thou hast on the
one last cut me all these shoes? How can the great sole belong to the
little shoe?” And Owlglass said unto him: “That will I do after, and the
other will I cut.” Then said the master: “But thou takest only one last,
and makest them all for one foot; what dost thou expect can I do with
thy work?” Then answered Owlglass unto him: “Of a truth, master, thou
didst bid me to cut them over one last only, and that have I done.”
Thereat said the master: “If that I had much to do with thee, should I
have to run with thee to the hangman;” and he furthermore said unto him:
“Pay thou me for the leather thou hast marred.” Then said Owlglass: “If
that I have marred thy leather, the currier can he not make more?” Then
arose he, and stood in the door, and turning himself round unto the
master, said: “If that I come not again, have I yet been with thee.
Farewell.” And he departed from that city.




                     The Forty and Ninth Adventure.

      _How that Owlglass bought eggs and had them tightly packed._


On a time Owlglass came into a village in Swabia, where abode a man very
stupid, who with lard and eggs drave a trade. And Owlglass did become
serving-man unto him, and much business did for his master, by the which
he gained greatly. In this wise and after this manner was it that
Owlglass did all that his master required. His master sent him unto the
market, that he might cheaply buy and dearly sell; for according to such
modes grow all merchants rich. And it came to pass on a day, that
Owlglass had bought so much, that his baskets, panniers, and chests were
all full of lard and butter and eggs, and yet craved he to buy much
more. Then lifted he up his voice, and spake unto his master, saying:
“Behold, master, between each egg is there a great room; might it not
be, that we might get more in if that, like unto cabbages, we trod them
closer together?” And the stupid egg-merchant perceived that to be most
true; and then bid he the folk which helped him to tread the eggs close
together. And so did they; but, lo! then were their feet all yellow, and
the eggs were soon broken to pieces. Then did the master of Owlglass cry
out upon his man, and despatched him hastily to do business elsewhere;
for the egg-trade did he not understand. Yet was the story soon noised
abroad; and thenceforward laughed the people, and called the Swabians
yellow-feet, the which name remaineth even unto days of this chronicler.




                        The Fiftieth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass made a soup for a boor, and put therein shoemaker’s
 oil; for that, in his nobility, he thought it good enow for the boor._


Now after these knaveries came Owlglass unto Stade, and there he again
hired him unto a shoemaker. And when that he began the first day to
work, his master went unto market, and of a boor bought a load of wood,
and then came home, and commanded that the boor should have a soup given
unto him. But he found no one at home; for the goodwife and the maid had
gone forth, and Owlglass was alone within the house; and he was sewing
shoes. And the master was obliged again to go to the market. So spake he
to Owlglass, and said, that he should make ready a soup for the boor;
for that had he promised him into their bargain. And Owlglass answered:
“Yea;” then the boor unloaded the wood, and came into the house. But
when that Owlglass sought in the cupboard, and had made ready the soup,
he found nothing to flavour it save shoemaker’s oil; so he took the
bottle, and poured therefrom a goodly measure into the soup, and a fine
flavour was there then therein. And when that the boor began to eat, he
tasted that it was very evil; but he was an hungered, and he soon ate up
the soup. In no long time thereafter came the shoemaker home, and asked
the boor how the soup tasted. And the boor answered him: “That it was
good all but one thing, and that was, that it savoured woundily of new
shoes.” Then departed the boor. And the shoemaker laughed, and said unto
Owlglass: “What didst thou put in the soup thou gavest to the boor?” And
Owlglass answered, and said: “Thou commandest me that I should take that
I found and put in the soup; and I found nought but the shoemaker’s oil.
Therefore put I that in.” And the shoemaker said: “It is well, and quite
good enough to give for a bargain to a boor.” And so were the two knaves
contented; but as two of a trade never can agree together, in no long
time parted they, and Owlglass continued his journey.




                     The Fifty and First Adventure.

_This chapter is a special chapter, telling how that a bootmaker sought
to beguile Owlglass by greasing his boots, and how that Owlglass looked
                   through the window, and brake it._


Christopher was the name of a bootmaker, who, in Brunswick, lived upon
the Cabbage-market. Unto him on a time went Owlglass, that he might have
his boots greased. And when that he came into the house, he opened his
mouth, and said: “Master, an if ye will smear me these boots well and
throughly, I will pay your demand, so that I have them by Monday.” And
the master answered, and said: “Yea, truly shall ye have them.” Then
departed Owlglass from the house, and thought no longer thereupon; for
when wise men say things shall be done, it is the fool’s fault if they
be not. And after that he had gone his way, the bootmaker’s man said:
“Behold, master, have a care; for that is Owlglass, and to all men doth
he work knavery. Do, therefore, that he said, or he will work ye a vile
turn.” Then answered the master, and said: “What would he have?” And the
man said: “He said, smear me these boots and throughly. Therefore do ye
according to his words, and smear ye them within and without.” Then
answered the master unto him, and said: “That will I do.” So did he, in
truth.

And on the Monday cometh Owlglass, and he saith unto them: “Have ye my
boots ready?” And the master had hung them upon a hook in his shop, and
answered unto him, and said, as he pointed unto them: “Behold, there
have ye your boots as they hang.” And Owlglass looked, and saw that they
were so smeared within and without; and he laughed, and said: “How good
and pious a master bootmaker have I found, that he doth smear me my
boots throughly. And what may ye desire to have for your pains?” Then
spake the master: “An old penny will I have.” Then did Owlglass give him
an old penny he had by him, and departed from the house; and then
laughed the master and his man, and said one to the other: “How may he
take that? Surely now hath he been made a fool!” That heard our good
Master Owlglass; and he put his head within the window so that it brake,
and head and shoulders followed after, to the great wonderment of all
thereby. And Owlglass said unto the bootmaker: “Master, what lard used
ye? Tell me if it be lard from a sow or a boar?” Thereat was the master
amazed with his man, and at last perceived that Owlglass lay in the
window, and he had broken it. Then the bootmaker grew angry, and said:
“The genius of evil take thee! What meanest thou? With this lapstone
will I break thy head!” Then said Owlglass: “Honourable sir, be not
angry. It is but a simple answer I would have. Which is it from which ye
have taken the lard, from a sow or a boar?” And the master wished his
window whole. But he answered never a word; and thereat said Owlglass:
“If that ye will not tell me, I must depart to foreign lands to have it
certified, and of another must I learn whether it be of a sow or a
boar.” Therewith departed Owlglass.

Then waxed the master wroth with his man, and said unto him: “That
counsel gavest thou me; now give me other counsel how that my window may
be whole.” But the servant was dumb. So said the master: “Which hath
been the greatest fool among these, and who shall pay the damage?” But
the comrade held his tongue; and the master continued: “Who is it that
hath mocked the other? How shall my window be made whole? I have always
heard it said: He that is heavy laden with a fool may soon rejoice to
lose his pack from his shoulders; and if I had done that might I have
kept my window, nor would I have cared an if it had been in that wise.”
Therefore departed the apprentice, and bootmaker Christopher paid for
his broken window himself.




                    The Fifty and Second Adventure.

  _Telleth how that Owlglass at Einbeck became a brewer’s man, and did
                  seethe a dog which was called Hops._


Owlglass tarried not at any time in doing his evil knavery. And he came
unto Einbeck after a time, and in that town did he hire him unto a
brewer to be his man. Then came it to pass, that the brewer his master
desired to go unto a wedding; and he spake unto Owlglass, and said unto
him: “Do thou brew with the maid while I am away from hence, and
to-morrow will I return to help thee in thy labour. Yet, above all, do
ye not forget to put hops into the beer, so that it shall savour
strongly thereof, and be a most desirable thing to buy.” And Owlglass
answered and said unto his master, that would he diligently perform unto
his content. Then did the brewer with his wife depart out of the door to
the wedding. Then began Owlglass to brew the beer; and the serving-woman
taught him what he should do, forasmuch as she understood it better than
he did. And when it came to be time that the hops should be put therein,
the maid said unto him: “Lo! my dear fellow-servant, thou canst boil the
hops alone as well as while I am with thee. Therefore do thou boil them,
and I will go for an hour unto the dance.” And Owlglass said: “Yea;” and
thought within himself: “When that she hath departed out of the way,
then canst thou better do thy knavery. What shall it be that thou wilt
do unto this brewer?”

Now the brewer had in his house a great dog, whose name was Hops; and
when the water was hot, took Owlglass the poor beast, and threw him into
the vat, and boiled him therein, so that the flesh was boiled from off
the bones, and the skin and hair was sodden altogether. Thereafter
thought the maid, that it was time she should return home unto Owlglass,
for the hops must have been seethed enough. She entered in unto him, and
spake unto him: “Lo! my brother, now have the hops seethed enough; draw
off.” Then took she a sieve and strained the beer, but found nought
therein; then said she unto Owlglass: “Hast thou also put therein the
hops, as I said unto ye? I find nought therein.” But Owlglass said:
“Thou wilt find all at the bottom.” And the woman took a shovel, and
found the bones of the dog at the bottom. Then cried she aloud: “What is
this thing thou hast put therein? The evil one defend me from this
beer!” And Owlglass answered: “What our master commanded me that did I.
I seethed therein Hops our dog.”

It fortuned that the brewer then entered in unto them, and he had
drunken himself drunk at the wedding; and he said unto them: “Ha! ha!
what is it that ye do, my children?” Then answered the maid, and said
unto him: “Lo! I did but go for half an hour unto the dance, and bade
this our new man to seethe the hops in the beer; and he hath taken our
dog, and hath seethed him. Behold, ye may see his bones.” Then spake
Owlglass, and said: “Truly did I nothing more than ye enjoined me to do.
Ye said that Hops should I seethe, and that have I done. But ye are
ungrateful when that I am obedient. Had ye servants which ever did that
which ye commanded as I have done, would ye surely have great content.”
Then departed he, and was wroth that they thanked him not.

[Illustration: HOW OWLGLASS BOILETH HOPS.]




                     The Fifty and Third Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass hired him unto a tailor, and sewed so secretly that
                      it was not seen of any one._


And when that Owlglass approached unto Berlin, he there hired him unto a
tailor of that town. Then said his master unto him, as he sate in the
workshop: “If that thou sewest for me, sew for me after that wise that
it shall be seen of no one.” To him answered Owlglass: “Yea;” and with
that took his work, and crept him under the counter, and put his work
across his knee, and began there to sew. The tailor stood thereby, and
looked upon him, and said unto him: “What doest thou? Of a truth that is
a marvellous way to sew thy coat.” And Owlglass answered: “Master, said
ye not that I should sew in such wise as that it should be seen of no
one, and can any one behold me where I sew?” Then said the tailor: “Nay;
but, my dear serving-man, sew ye no longer after that wise, but begin to
sew that all may see.”

So fared they on for a matter of three days; and it fortuned one night,
that a peasant’s great over-coat, such as in that country is called a
wolf, lay unfinished in the shop. This took the tailor, and gave it unto
Owlglass, and said unto him: “Here, take the wolf and make it ready, and
thereafter mayest thou get thee to bed.” Then answered Owlglass: “Yea;
and if ye go will I right quickly do it as ye enjoin.” Then departed the
master; and Owlglass took the coat, and he cut it up, and made first a
wolf’s head, and then legs and body, and with sticks set it upright on
the bench, so that it looked like unto a wolf, and then gat he him unto
bed. And when that it was day, the master gat him up, and awakened
Owlglass also, and found the wolf standing in the shop. And he marvelled
with great wonderment at this doing of Owlglass; and he said unto him
when that he came: “I’ the prince of mischief’s name, what is this thing
thou hast done?” And Owlglass answered, and said: “A wolf have I made,
as ye enjoined me.” Then said the tailor: “Such a wolf would I not have;
but a peasant’s great coat. That called I a wolf.” Thereat answered
Owlglass, and spake unto the tailor, saying: “Dear master, that knew not
I. An ye had said unto me, that ye would have a peasant’s coat, then
would I have made it; but ye said I should make a wolf, and, lo! have I
not done it? And with greater content would I have made a coat than a
wolf.” And the tailor forgave him; for as it was ended, what should he
do?

And after four days had passed, was the tailor fain again to sleep, and
yet he judged that it was too soon for his man to get him to bed. And
there lay a coat in the shop, the which had been finished, all save the
arms, which should be sewed on. This took he, and gave it unto Owlglass,
saying: “Whip me these arms to the coat, and then mayest thou sleep.”
And Owlglass answered: “Yea;” and therewith departed the tailor. Then
did Owlglass light two candles, and he hung the coat on a hook, and made
him a whip with whipcord, and ’gan to whip the sleeves, so that he might
get them unto the coat. Yet stirred they not. And when that his candles
were burned down, gat he two more, and lighted them, and burned candles
through the whole night. At last arose the master, and came unto
Owlglass into the shop, and said unto him: “What mystery play ye here?”
And Owlglass answered gravely, and said: “No mystery is this, but hard
labour; for the whole night through have I stood here, and whipped me
these sleeves with whipcord, yet move they not unto the coat. Better had
it been if that ye had bid me sleep; for ye surely knew that I must lose
my labour.” Then answered the tailor, and said: “Lay ye that to my
charge? Am I ever to be finding ye brains to understand that which I
say? Didst not see that I meant that ye should sew the sleeves on to the
coat?” Answered straightway unto him Owlglass: “Nay; but, in the evil
one’s name, how can ye think that it be my fault, that when ye say one
thing I should understand ye to mean another thing? If that I had known
what ye would have done, would I not have sewn the sleeves on, and then
slept an hour or twain? Now may ye sit ye down, for I will get me unto
my bed.” Thereat said the tailor: “Not so; I will not receive into my
house folk that lazy be and sleep.” Then did they strive together in
anger; and the tailor would have payment of Owlglass for the candles he
had burned, but this would not Owlglass give him; therefore took he that
which belonged unto him, and departed.




                    The Fifty and Fourth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass caused three tailors to fall from their board, and
then would have persuaded the people that the wind had blown them down._


On the market at Brandenburg, Owlglass abode in an inn for a matter of
fourteen days. And hard by there dwelt a tailor, and on his board had he
three of his men sitting at work. And when that Owlglass passed by over
against them, they did nothing but mock him, and throw rags after him.
And all this time kept Owlglass silence; and one day when that it was a
full market-day, did he secretly the night before saw through the posts
which held up the board, and so left them standing. In the morning did
the men put the board on the posts, and sate them down as usual, and
sewed. At the time when that the swineherd blew his horn that every one
might drive forth his swine, came the tailor’s swine forth likewise, and
ran under the window, and against the posts began to rub themselves;
then came down the three tailors, and fell upon the ground, and sorely
hurt themselves. And when Owlglass marked that they fell, he cried with
a loud voice: “Behold, ye people, of what light account are tailors,
when that by the wind three are blown down from the board!” These words
of Owlglass heard the whole market, and the people therein. Then ran all
the market-place in great haste, and laughed, and mocked the tailors
with great scorn; and then did the tailors abuse each one the other with
much evil language, for they wist not how it had come to pass that they
had fallen. At last did they behold that the posts were sawed through,
and knew well that it was Owlglass. Then did they set new posts in the
ground, but mocked him no longer.




                     The Fifty and Fifth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass assembled all the tailors throughout the whole land
   of Saxony, by proclaiming that he would teach them a mighty useful
     thing, that would get bread both for them and their children._


On a time, Owlglass made proclamation in the whole of the Wendic Union,
and in the land of Saxony, that is, in Holstein, Pommern, Stettin, and
Mecklenburg, and likewise in Lübeck, Hamburg, in the Sound, and at
Wismar; and in his letters said, that truly the tailors in those parts
should come unto him, for tidings of great joy and content did he bring,
and a cunning and rare art would he disclose unto them, by the which
they should have great comfort and gain, and their children after them.
And he said, that they should come unto him into the town of Rostock,
and so should assemble together. Then did they all make answer unto
Owlglass, that for so great an art would they willingly come, and learn
that art of which he spake.

And so came they all together upon occasion to Rostock; and the folks
were all amazed as to why so great a number of tailors came and abode in
that town. When that Owlglass also heard that they had approached and
entered into the town, he was right glad; and he let them grow in
multitude until that among these tailors were a goodly number of men.
Thereafter spake they unto Owlglass, and said unto him, that, according
unto his word, they had come together, and that they would fain learn of
him what that art was which they should be taught, and the which should
benefit both them and their children. Then besought they him that he
should soon teach them; and rarely would they recompence him therefor.
And Owlglass answered, and said unto them: “Yea; do ye all together come
into a field, so that all may hear.” And according unto his saying did
they.

Then gat him Owlglass up into a house, which overlooked the field, and
there looked he forth from a window; and he lifted up his voice, and
said unto them: “Honourable artificers in the tailoring trade, I bid ye
mark and perceive, that when ye have by ye scissors, ellwand, thread,
thimble, needle, and a smoothing-iron, the which ye call a goose, then
have ye enough tools for your business; and to get them, therein is no
art, for common is it, and cometh of itself. But do ye steadfastly learn
of me this art, and bear ye me in mind when that ye do it. When that ye
take a thread, forget ye not at the end thereof that is contrary unto
that which ye thread in the needle to make a knot, or, in good sooth, ye
will make many a stitch in vain.” Thereat did one tailor look upon his
neighbour; and they each one said unto the other: “Lo! was not this a
thing well known unto all of us, and of old time a rule among us?” Then
did they ask him whether he had anything further to tell them. “Verily!
for phantasy’s sake would not we have come twelve weary miles, or
despatched from one to the other messengers of speed; and this art ye
have told us have we known these thousand years.” Then answered Owlglass
unto the tailors, and said unto them: “That which hath been known these
thousand years is marked of no man; and when that people are bidden to
think upon it, do they not in any wise thank the speaker.” Therefore
might they depart again unto where they had come from. Then were the
tailors who had come from afar very wroth with Owlglass, and would fain
have come to him, and beaten him; but he was nimble and escaped them.
Then conferred they one with the other, and laughed, and said: “Truly
was it their own fault that they were thus befooled; for knew they not
of old what a slippery fellow was this same Owlglass?”




                     The Fifty and Sixth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass beat wool upon a saint’s day, and that very high._


And when that Owlglass came unto Stendal, he gave it out, that he was a
woolstapler, and hired himself unto a master in that town. Then upon a
Sunday spake the master unto him, saying: “Mark ye, my good fellow, upon
a Monday do ye commonly keep holiday, and that love I not in any man who
cometh into my house; for here must all diligently labour.” And Owlglass
made answer: “That pleaseth me right well, master.” So he gat him up
early on the Monday, and laboured hard, and the same thing did he on
Tuesday; and that pleased the master exceedingly. And on the Wednesday
there fell a saint’s day, the which was a holy day and should be kept;
yet gat Owlglass to his labour again, and ’gan to work and beat his
wool, so that ye might hear him right down the street. The master arose
from his bed when that he heard the noise, and cried unto Owlglass with
a loud voice: “Be ye still; be ye still; to-day is a holy day, and we
may not labour.” Then said Owlglass: “Dear master, said ye not on
Sunday, that ye loved not that one should be idle on a holy day; but ye
said, that I should work the whole week through.” And the woolstapler
answered him: “Nay; but I meant not that. Leave thy labour now, and that
which thou wouldst have earned to-day will I pay thee.” And this fitted
Owlglass right well; and he kept the holy day, and at eventide he supped
with his master. Then conferred they; and the master said unto him, that
the wool contented him not, and he bade Owlglass, that he should beat it
up a little higher. And Owlglass said: “Yea;” and in the morning he
arose from his bed early, and fixed up the frame to the beam, and gat
him a ladder, and mounted thereupon, and with his rod beat the wool, so
that all the town could hear the noise. The while lay the master in bed,
and he perceived right certainly that Owlglass was not beating the wool
as he should do; therefore he gat up, and went, and looked upon him. And
he spake unto him jestingly: “By my troth, and if ye stood upon the roof
so would ye be yet higher; and little would it rede whether ye stood on
the ladder or the roof.” And therewith departed he unto the church.
Thereupon did Owlglass take the frame, and climbed up on the roof, and
there beat the wool. That saw his master from the street as he came
along; and he cried aloud unto him, and came running: “Ha! ho! what do
ye there upon the roof? Is that a thing ye should do, to beat the wool
upon the roof?” And Owlglass said: “Truly did I according unto thy
words. For thou didst say, that it would be better upon the roof than
the ladder, for that the roof was higher than the beam.” And the
woolstapler said: “Play ye no more of your knaveries; get ye forth from
my house, nor do ye again come hither.” Thereat departed Owlglass, and
lamented that he could never earn any thanks.




                    The Fifty and Seventh Adventure.

   _How that Owlglass was hired by a furrier, and did sleep among the
                                skins._


On a time did Owlglass take service with a furrier, and when that it was
night, he bade Owlglass get him to work and hang out the skins. But
Owlglass loved not the labour, and would fain have escaped therefrom.
And he spake unto his master, saying: “How is this that with so ill
savour this smelleth. I’ faith, I cannot bear it!” And the furrier
answered him and said: “Verily, it seemeth unto me that of this trade
knowest thou nought. For an if thou hadst slept only four nights among
the furs, then wouldst thou no longer mark their ill savour.” Then said
Owlglass: “Four nights will I sleep among the skins, master, and then
shall I not mark it.” So the furrier gat him to bed. And behold,
Owlglass took the skins which were prepared, and which hung upon the
wall, and he took also the skins which were dry; and lastly, took he the
wet skins; and he cast them together upon the floor of the loft, and
crept in among them and slept until the morning. When that it was day,
then rose up his master, and he beheld that the skins were taken from
the wall; and he ran unto the loft, and spake unto Owlglass to inquire
of him what it might fortune that he knew about the skins. And he
perceived not Owlglass; but lo! his eyes fell upon the skins, which, wet
and dry, lay together in a heap one with the other. Thereat was he
strangely moved, and with a weeping voice called the maid and the women
folk; and these cries did cause Owlglass to awake, and he looked forth
from among the skins, and said: “Honoured master, what may it be that
doth move ye so to cry out and to clamour?” Then did the furrier marvel
greatly, and knew not what might be in the heap of skins.

And he opened his mouth, and said unto Owlglass: “Where art thou?” And
Owlglass to him answered: “Behold, here am I.” Then said the master:
“That good fortune may never come unto thee! Hast taken me the dry furs
from the wall, and the wet from the lime-pit, and cast me them together
in this heap, so that they be spoiled. What wilt thou with this
phantasy?” But the wise and prudent Master Owlglass answered him and
said: “How, master, be ye not angry! for an if ye be angry for that I
have slept one night amidst the skins, what will ye be when that I have
slept the four nights ye enjoined me; for ye said that I knew nought of
the labour.” Then said the furrier: “Now liest thou like unto a false
and ready knave! I bid thee not carry together the wet and the dry, and
sleep amid them after this wise!” Then sought the furrier for a stick,
and tried to beat Owlglass. But then went Owlglass towards the door to
depart thence; and as he went he met the wife of the furrier, and the
maid servant, and they would fain have held him. But he said unto them:
“Peace be with ye, good friends, let me hasten for a chirurgeon, for my
master hath fallen, and his leg hath broken!” Then they let him go, and
ran up the stairs unto the master; but he came running down at a great
pace, and overthrew the maid and his good wife, and they all stumbled
and fell together. Yet our good master had speedily departed, and gotten
him thence with all haste.




                    The Fifty and Eighth Adventure.

       _How that Owlglass on a time, at Berlin, did make wolves._


Of a cunning and wily mind are the Swabians, and where they come and
find not victual, ye may approve it of a certainty that other folk will
starve. Yet are they more lovers of the beer jug, and of drinking, than
thoughtful of their labour, so comes it likewise that their business
lieth but sadly. Now it happened on a time that at Berlin lived a
furrier, and he was in Swabia born, and in his art was he most handy,
and had much business, and thereto was rich, with a good workshop, by
the which he had gained much, as he served those which held lands, and
moneys, and houses, and goodly titles. And it came to pass that one
winter season a great and noble prince, with all his court, desired to
hunt; and they commanded the furrier to prepare for them not a few wolf
skins to wear. Of this was Owlglass told, so he gat him unto the
furrier, and besought him that he would give unto him work, that he
might have money and food. At that time, also, did the master lack
people, and was right glad that Owlglass had come unto him; and he spake
unto him, and asked him, if that he would make such wolves. And Owlglass
answered: “That he was of the land of Saxony, and knew well how to make
them.” Then said the furrier unto him: “Truly art thou well come unto
me, and I bid thee stay. And touching the reward of thy pains will we
agree, and thou shalt abide with me, and have a good time while that
thou stayest.” Owlglass answered and said unto the furrier: “Yea,
master, I do bethink me that thou art right honest and true; and I crave
nothing so much as that ye shall know me for what manner of man I am,
when that ye behold my labour. But I work not in fellowship with other
men; but ever alone in mine own company.”

Then did the furrier allot unto Owlglass a small chamber wherein he
abode; and he received from the furrier the metage of certain furs, and
the wolves’ skins. Then took Owlglass the wolves’ skins as they were,
and cut them, and made of them a number of wolves; and these he stuffed
full of hay, and gat feet made of sticks, and they stood up in manner as
if they lived. And when that he had thus cut up all the furs, and made
an end of his labours, he cried aloud to his master: “Ho! master, come
hither; truly have I ended my labour, and made the wolves.” And the
master answered and said: “Yea, my good man, verily have I yet much
labour to do! Be thou diligent, and continue as thou art.” Then turned
he about to go thence, and he beheld the wolves standing in the chamber,
and he lifted up his voice thereat, and cried aloud in great anger:
“What is this that thou hast done! Thou bird of unhappy fortune! what
evil hast thou wrought unto me? For this will I have thee cast into
gaol, and thou shalt suffer therefor.” Then answered Owlglass and said:
“Master, call ye that my reward and my thanks. Ye commanded me that I
should make wolves, and wolves have I also made. Had ye but said that I
should make wolf furs, then had I understood ye, and also have done it
with great joy. In the beginning should ye have explained carefully unto
one that is a stranger that which ye would have. And, indeed, had it
appeared unto me that I should have gained no greater thanks than that
which hath been given me, then would I not have wrought thy work in any
wise.” Then departed Owlglass from Berlin, and gat him into the city of
Leipzig.




                     The Fifty and Ninth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass, being servant unto a great lord, did fetch for him
          wine and beer together in a most delectable manner._


Once again did Owlglass take service with a noble lord, and became unto
him body servant. And it fortuned, that this master of his loved good
cheer,—the which is a thing not rare among all manner of men,—and
especially loved he a cup of generous wine, or a deep draught of good
beer.

It came to pass, that on a time Owlglass and his master journeyed
together, and lay at an inn. And the day was hot, and they twain were
faint, for they had ridden hard. Then spake the lord unto his
serving-man Owlglass, and said: “Go thou and find mine host the landlord
of this inn, and fetch him unto me.” That did Owlglass on that instant;
for well knew he, that when the master drank the man was seldom dry. And
his lord spake unto the host, and said unto him: “Lo! we have come far,
and the sun hath burned us so that we be dry, and would have some
drink.” And the host answered him: “Verily, in all the wide world, and
the Duchy of Mecklenburg to boot, is there no such liquor as in my
cellar. Therefore have ye come unto the best place to slake your
thirst.” Then commanded the master, that Owlglass should depart with the
host; and he said unto him: “I know not the which is best, therefore do
thou bring me good store of both wine and beer, and bring ye them
together.” And Owlglass said: “Yea;” and departed with the host. Then
the host meted unto him both of wine and of beer; and Owlglass said unto
himself: “If that I faint then loseth my master his good servant;
therefore, that I may truly serve him, will I first drink, for
peradventure I shall not have strength to bring the liquor unto my
lord.” Therefore drank he merrily the half of the wine and the half of
the beer, and remembered his lord’s words, that they should be together;
therefore mingled he the wine and the beer in one measure, and gave unto
his lord to drink. And when that the lord found how delectable was the
mixture, he waxed very wroth, and said unto Owlglass: “What is this that
thou hast done, and what vile liquor is this?” “Truly, my lord,” quoth
honest Owlglass, “it is wine and beer mingled together, as ye enjoined
me to bring unto ye.” But his master perceived it was a knavery, and
bade Owlglass to depart from his sight; for, of a truth, was his
beguiling most evilly done. But sorrowfully departed Owlglass, for he
thought that he wrought no harm in doing the thing which was commanded
unto him. Indeed, my masters, often times falleth the evil temper of the
one upon the other; and for the too exact enactment of the commands of
the master is the man chidden.




                        The Sixtieth Adventure.

    _How that Owlglass for a tanner prepared leather with stools and
          benches, at the good city of Brunswick on the Dam._


Now it fortuned that as Owlglass journeyed from Leipzig, he came unto
Brunswick to a tanner there, who made ready the leather for the
shoemaker. And it was winter time, and he said unto himself: “Now shalt
thou stay the winter through with this tanner.” Then agreed they
together, and he hired himself unto him. And after that eight days had
gone by, it came to pass that the tanner desired to depart unto a feast,
and he commanded Owlglass the while that he should make ready some
leather. For he said unto him: “The cauldron of leather prepare ye.” And
Owlglass asked him: “What shall I do it with? and where shall I find
wood for the fire?” And the tanner answered and said unto him:
“Wherefore ask ye such an idle question? If that I had no wood upon the
wood-heap, have I yet store of stools and benches enough in the house,
with the which thou mayest prepare the leather.” And Owlglass answered:
“Yea;” and then departed the tanner. Then did Owlglass take a cauldron,
and hung it over the fire, and put one skin of leather after another
therein, and boiled the leather until it was so soft that ye might, with
two fingers, rend it in twain. And when that Owlglass found this he took
a hatchet, and therewith hewed in pieces every stool and bench the which
were in the house, and he put them in the fire under the cauldron, and
boiled the leather yet more until that he looked therein again, and lo!
these stools and benches were all burned up. Then took he the leather
out of the cauldron, and put it in a heap, and departed out of the house
and the city, and continued his journeying.

But the tanner thought not a jot upon the matter, but ate and drank, and
gat him to bed, and slept. Next morning ’gan he to think it was time he
should see what labour had been fulfilled of his man; therefore he
arose, and went unto the workshop, and found the heap of leather so
marred, and neither stool or bench in the place. Then grew he right
angry, and went unto his wife, and said unto her: “Behold, I fear our
man that we hired was Owlglass, that great knave, cheat, and beguiler;
for it is his custom to do everything that is told according to the
words spoken unto him. And now hath he departed, and marred me all the
leather, and burned me up every stool and bench the which stood in our
house.” Then wept his wife, and spake unto him, saying: “Get ye after
him with all speed, and bring him back hither.” But the tanner said:
“Nay, that will I not do. I have had of him enough.” And perchance was
this saying true.




                     The Sixty and First Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass was groom unto a noble lord, and what knavery he
               wrought unto his lord’s horse, Rosimond._


On a time it fortuned, that with a lord of great wealth and much land,
our noble Master Owlglass took service. Now this most noble gentleman,
when that he entered into the lord his household, was made to be groom
of the horses; and his lord commanded and enjoined him, that he should
have a great care of the horses, and in especial he desired Owlglass to
dress and tend a horse of a milk-white skin and gentle blood, named
Rosimond. And this horse did his lord love better than any other steed;
for that it was of a disposition most rare. Yet did Owlglass none the
less bethink him of a knavery the which he might do unto this lord; for
from a deceitful beguiling could he at no time refrain. But he answered
his lord when that he charged him; and spake unto him, saying: “Yea, my
good lord and master; all that ye bid me to do will I with great
diligence perform.” And therewith departed his lord from him, and
rejoiced with great content that he had obtained for himself so
excellent a groom.

In no long time thereafter were all the horses put forth into the
fields, there to graze, and to exercise themselves after the manner of
horses. Then gat Owlglass unto his lord, and stood before him, and said:
“Of a truth, master, well know I that of thy horses there is not one
that thou lovest so well as thou dost the milk-white steed Rosimond.”
And thereto said his master: “Yea.” “Then of that steed,” answered
Owlglass, “have I had special care. Yet I fear me, master, that by thy
answer unto me, he will not be long to live.” Then said his master: “If
that be so, and my beloved steed is not long to live, go thou, my trusty
groom, and get ye me his skin, that I may have it.” For Rosimond’s skin
was of a most rare beauty. Thereat answered Owlglass: “Yea;” and gat him
to the field where Rosimond was grazing, and pursued him. But the horse
was very fleet, and fled before Owlglass; and it was eventide ere
Owlglass caught him. Then when he had thus caught him, he took a knife
and killed Rosimond, and took his skin, and brought it unto his lord.
And when that he brought it unto him, he said unto Owlglass: “How cometh
this? Verily, the whole day hast thou been away, and surely in a less
time than a whole day couldst thou have taken off the skin.” And
Owlglass excused himself, saying: “Lo! my good lord, most truly sayest
thou that in less than a whole day could I have taken off the skin; yet
had I great labour in the matter, for Rosimond fled before me, and was
fleet of foot. Now have I brought the skin, as thou didst enjoin me.”
Then waxed the master of Owlglass very wroth, and cried aloud unto him:
“Thou knave, was not my horse Rosimond dead then? Didst thou kill my
horse?” To him quoth Owlglass: “Yea, truly killed I the horse; for so
cruel am I not, that I should take the skin off a living horse. For in
torture-chambers do they only such things, either unto man or unto
beast.” Then wept the lord greatly for his beloved horse; and he would
have killed Owlglass, but that Owlglass fled, saying: “I did but
according to the words of my master; for I said unto him, that I feared
me that the horse would not live any long while; and then commanded he
that I should take his skin, the which I have done, and my kind heart
hath injured me, in that I did not skin the horse ere I killed it.” Then
departed Owlglass in great haste, and came not again into that lord’s
house.




                    The Sixty and Second Adventure.

   _How that Owlglass beguiled the drawer at the town-house cellar of
      Lübeck, and did for a can of wine give him a can of water._


When that Owlglass came unto Lübeck, he took great heed to commit no
knavery; for in that town are the folk very strict upon such as beguile
or deceive. Therefore was our good master sadly perplexed and unhappy,
for that in no wise could he gratify the feelings of his heart and
content himself as he was wont to do. And at that time there lived in
the town of Lübeck a drawer, named Lamprecht, who kept the cellar at the
town house; and he was a man very proud, who believed that no person in
Lübeck,—yea, no person in the whole world,—was so wise and so important
and so discerning as he. Nor did he at any time think that he might not
say it of himself; and when that he said it, he used to add, that one
that would beguile him must of a morning rise very early. For this
reason were the citizens very wroth with him, and held him as an enemy.

Now when that Owlglass heard of the arrogance of this man, he could no
longer keep hidden the knave which he was; and he thought within
himself, that he would soon shew that he was an even master in craft and
cunning with him. Therefore took he two cans of the same size and form;
the one he carried openly in his hand, and it was empty; but the other
bare he secretly under his cloak, and it was filled with water. Then
departed he unto the wine-cellar, and there had a measure of wine meted
unto him, and then deftly took forth the can with water and set it down,
and put the wine-can within his cloak. And Owlglass lifted up his voice,
and said unto the drawer: “Worshipful master drawer, what costeth this
wine?” And he answered, and said unto him: “Truly, it is tenpence the
measure.” Then said Owlglass: “The wine is marvellous costly. I have no
more than sixpence. Can I have it for that money?” Then waxed the drawer
very wroth, and said: “Wilt thou dare to value the wine of my lords the
town council? Here have we a fixed sum; and he that liketh not the
price, may let the wine stay in the butt.” Therewith taketh he in his
wrath the can with the water in it; and Owlglass said unto him: “See
thou, an if ye will not have the sixpence, therefore I am content ye
shall pour it back.” Then the drawer poured the water into the butt, for
he thought that it was the wine; and he said unto him: “What a foolish
knave art thou? Thou hast wine meted unto thee, but thou carest not to
pay therefor.” Then took Owlglass the empty can, and departed, and said:
“Verily do I see that thou art a fool; and there is no one so cunning
and wise in this world, that may not by a fool be beguiled. Aye, and
that too if he were a drawer!” Then he returned forth from the cellar,
and he thought himself safe.




                     The Sixty and Third Adventure.

_How that Owlglass ’scaped hanging by his cunning, and would have hanged
                   himself for a crown, yet did not._


When that Owlglass came forth into day from the cellar, the drawer,
Lamprecht, did bethink him of the words which Owlglass spake, and he ran
hastily for a police officer, and they pursued Owlglass, and in no long
time took him in the street as he went forward. The officer seized him,
and they examined our noble Master Owlglass, and found upon him the two
cans, and of them one contained the wine of the which he had beguiled
the drawer, and the other was empty. And, O and alas! that the pen of
this chronicler should write so sad a thing of the virtuous Master
Owlglass!—they held him for a thief, and took him first and carried him
and cast him into the city prison, and there lay he. And then assembled
the council of the town, and they conferred together touching the
offence of Master Owlglass, and it was agreed amongst them that he had
committed a grave crime, for the doing and enactment of which it was
fitting that he should be hanged up until that he was dead. Yet did some
aver that it was nought else but a subtle device and knavery, and that
the drawer should have, with more care, avoided the over-reaching with
the which he had been visited; so that, indeed, the fault, in so much as
it touched Master Owlglass, was but an impudent action. But the many
who, with great hatred, hated Master Owlglass, carried it that it was
flat robbery, so with their voices outweighed the rest, and he was
decreed to die.

And when the day came on the which he should be hanged up, there was a
great assembly of people in the city, for my good masters (as in this
town of ours in the which this book is imprinted and published), there
are ever lying in wait evil and cruel persons who, if it so chance, that
they themselves be not in fear of the gallows’ tree, will always hastily
run and see another die the death they would not command should be done
to their dogs. They came upon horses and on foot, and so great an uproar
was there, that at last the council was greatly vexed that they had
resolved to put him to death; for in good truth this deed was not
sufficient to be worthy of the gallows. And some desired to look upon
him to see how so marvellous a man would take his end. Others considered
that he was a magician, and with the aid of evil demons would rescue and
save himself, and of a truth did all hope that after some wise he would
come off alive. But all this time, as he was led forth, remained
Owlglass silent and still, and held his peace; and the multitude
marvelled, for they thought he would have despaired greatly. And when
that he was come unto the gallows’ tree, he opened his mouth and spake,
and besought the town council that as he was a dying man, and one that
would never again speak, that they would grant unto him one grace, and
he would not ask them for his life, nor for money, nor for anything the
which should cost them a penny; nay, but that by it he might, in good
sooth, save them a sum, and the charges of the town being heavy, it
would relieve them.

And then stood the council altogether, and marvelled what this might be;
and they conferred together, and agreed that, indeed, they would grant
him that he desired, if that it proved not against the things he had
himself said unto them. Then spake Owlglass unto the town council, and
said: “Indeed, it shall be manifest unto ye that it runneth not counter
unto my words. It is but a little matter the which can easily be told
unto ye, and give me now your hands, that it may be granted.” Thereat
did they according to his words. Then said good Master Owlglass, the
prisoner: “Noble and worshipful councillors of Lübeck! I have said unto
ye, that for as much as ye have condemned me to death, I should truly
suffer death as ye have decreed. But a grievous and heavy debt lieth
upon the city, the which every man should strive to lighten according
unto his means; and to do this will I also aid as best I may. This day
have ye brought me out to be hanged up; but see ye the halter wherewith
ye would hang me is a new one, and ye must be at charges therefor unto
two crowns. Now, if I say unto ye that I will, an if ye give me a crown,
go and fetch an old rope, and therewith hang myself, will ye make no
little profit; for my good friend the hangman, will not be at the pains
to hang me, and ye will save his fee, and all these men with the which
ye guard me, may freely depart unto their homes. Therefore I pray ye
that ye will give unto me the money, and at mine ease, when that I have
nought else to do, will I hang myself, in good faith, with an old rope.”
Then said the chief magistrate: “Of a truth the knave is right, and we
would do well to let him do this as he saith.” And they granted his
wish, and he departed thence; but in all his life was he never at his
ease sufficient to fulfil his saying. But oft he meditated thereupon,
intending to do it; yet the best intents are oft not to be discharged.




                    The Sixty and Fourth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass, at Helmstadt, caused a great pocket to be made._


A knavery did once Owlglass perform with a pocket. For in the town of
Helmstadt there lived a pocket-maker, and unto him came Owlglass, and
spake unto him, saying: “Wilt thou make for me a great pocket?” Then
answered the pocket-maker: “Yea, that will I. How great will thou have
it to be?” And Owlglass said unto him: “So that it be great enough I
shall be content therewith.” And at that time was it the set fashion to
wear great pockets of hair, broad and deep. Then did the pocket-maker
make for Owlglass such a great pocket as he would have him to do. And
when Owlglass came and looked upon it, he said: “Lo! this pocket is not
great enough. This is but a pocket-kin. Make for me one the which shall
be large enough. Of a truth will I pay thee well all thy labour.” Then
took the pocket-maker the skin of an ox, and made the pocket so great
that one might have put a calf of one year old within it, and it would
tax one man’s strength to lift it. Thereafter came Owlglass again unto
the house of the pocket-maker, and looked upon it, but it liked him not,
and again said he: “This pocket is not great enough. If that thou wilt
make me a pocket great enough, will I now give thee two crowns on the
business.” And the pocket-maker answered him: “Yea;” and took the two
crowns, and made another pocket; and thereunto took he three ox-hides,
and it was so heavy that two men would have had to bear it upon a frame,
and within might ye have put great store of corn. But when Owlglass
looked again upon the work of the master, he spake unto him, saying:
“Lo! my good master, this pocket is great enough, but the pocket I would
crave is not this one; therefore will I not have it. But an if ye would
fashion for me such a pocket that when I take from it one penny I shall
ever leave therein twain, I would most willingly pay thee for thy
labour.” And therewith departed Owlglass, and left the man with his
three pockets and the two crowns. Yet in leather had the work cost hard
upon ten crowns.




                     The Sixty and Fifth Adventure.

          _How that Owlglass, at Erfurt, beguiled a butcher._


When that Owlglass came unto the town of Erfurt, he forgat not to work
some piece of knavery. And soon was he well-known of the students and
townsfolk. One day he was going through the market-place, over against a
butcher’s shop, and the butcher cried aloud unto him that he should buy
somewhat of him that he might carry it home. Then answered Owlglass unto
the butcher, and said unto him: “What wilt thou that I shall take with
me?” And the butcher said: “What shalt thou take, sayest thou? Why,
truly, a good piece of beef!” Then said Owlglass: “Yea,” and took such a
piece and departed. Then ran the butcher, and pursued him, and said unto
him: “Nay; but do thou now pay me for this meat!” Thereat spake Owlglass
unto him, saying: “Of money didst thou say nothing at all unto me. Thou
didst say unto me with great kindness and courtesy, that I should take
something, and when I asked thee what it should be, thou didst single
out the beef; and that took I. And I can, by thy neighbours, prove that
it was after that wise that thou gavest unto me the beef.” Then came the
other butchers, neighbours of the one who had controversy with Owlglass,
and they confirmed our noble master from hatred of their neighbour, and
said: “Yea, that it was as the butcher had said unto the young man.” For
when that folk came to buy in the shambles, this butcher would always
cry aloud unto the customers that they should buy always of him.
Therefore did the neighbours help good Master Owlglass unto his piece of
beef. And while that the butcher was arguing and contending with anger
and strife on this matter, Owlglass put the beef within his cloak and
departed; thus left he them to contend together as long as it delighted
them.

[Illustration]




                     The Sixty and Sixth Adventure.

  _Telleth how that good Master Owlglass again beguiled the butcher at
         Erfurt, by pleasing him with a most grateful jingle._


In less than a week after, came Owlglass again unto the shambles. And
the same butcher spake once more to Owlglass, and mocked him, and said:
“Come hither again, and for thyself get a piece of beef.” And unto such
comforting words answered Owlglass: “Yea;” and would have taken a good
piece of meat; but the butcher in haste took hold of his meat, and kept
it. Then said Owlglass unto him: “Bide a while, and let the meat lie; I
will pay thee for it.” And the butcher laid the meat again upon the
bench. Then said Owlglass unto him: “Hear me what I say. If that I speak
such a word unto thee as shall content thee, will that be payment for
this meat, and I will not touch it in any wise?” And the butcher said:
“Lo! thou mightest say words unto me that would content me most greatly,
or words that would not agree; yet if thou sayest such words as shall be
pleasant, then canst thou take the meat.” Then spoke Owlglass after this
wise:

              “Be merry this day, and drink good wine;
              Thy meat will be paid for,—the money thine.”

“Truly this is a brave saying,” said the butcher; “but I would rather
have the doing. This likes me not. Say on.” Thereat spake Owlglass once
more:

                “The good wife scolds nor prates to-day;
                Be happy therefore whilst thou may.”

“Nay, nay,” said the butcher; “how can that be when that I have no wife.
Thy saying likes me not. Say on.” Then laughed Owlglass, and said:

                  “The butcher best likes to be paid,
                  So money-bag be now my aid.”

Then cried the butcher: “Such words are brave and true words. Behold,
thou speakest sensibly, and the saying like I well.” Thereat said
Owlglass: “Behold, then, the meat is mine. Good friends that stand
around, is it not true that I have now fulfilled my part?” And with much
clamour said they: “Yea;” and Owlglass took the meat, and departed. But
the butcher stood still, and knew not what to say unto them; for the
neighbours mocked him, and turned him to scorn. And if thereat he was
vexed, truly was it no great wonder.




                    The Sixty and Seventh Adventure.

 _Touching the faults of the which our noble Master Owlglas had a few;
      for he was human, and in all human things is imperfection._


My worthy masters, truly must ye have seen how virtuous, how wise, how
kind, how excellent a man was our noble Master Owlglass; so that as a
mirror of honesty and simplicity ye mote admire him. But, alas! this
present chronicler hath, with grief and sorrow, to confess, that even in
this great man was there error; and it behoveth a true historian justly
to set forth the imperfections of men as much as their marvellous
excellencies. And thus, with scrupulous care, say I now, that Master
Owlglass had, with his many noble qualities, the error of a short
memory. Most strange is this defect in so great a person: yet is it
true, that if he received money to pay to another, he forgat it; if he
owed money to another, he forgat it; and in eating and drinking most of
all was his memory treacherous and failing.

He sate at meat once in a noble house, where the folk were making
excellent cheer, and where, for more than six hours, sate they eating
and drinking; and Owlglass was with them, for he marked not the time.
Yet, at last, it was meet they should rise up from the table, and depart
each to his home. Then departed Owlglass also; and as he went, he passed
by a house where they sate at supper, and the master of that house
entreated him, that he should enter in unto them and eat. And so did he;
for he had forgotten altogether, that for six hours he had dined. Then
most excellently played he the guest at the table; and one that knew he
had come from the feast spake unto him, saying: “Lo! my beloved Master
Owlglass, how cometh it that ye eat so well now, having lately at the
banquet so lustily eaten?” And Owlglass answered: “Did I so? That have I
forgotten; for I have the misfortune to carry with me a belly that
lacketh memory in every wise.”




                    The Sixty and Eighth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass at Dresden became a carpenter, and for his pains
                         earned little thanks._


Soon departed Owlglass, and came unto Dresden, near unto the Bohemian
forest, upon the Elbe water, and there proclaimed that he was a
carpenter. And it fortuned, that a master carpenter in the town heard of
him, and hired him to be his journeyman; for his man had departed from
him, and he lacked some one to be man unto him. And as in this world of
ours, my masters, there be pleasure and gadding about and weddings as
well as woe and buryings, so fortuned it, that at that time there was in
the town such a wedding, and thereunto was the master carpenter bidden.
And he spake unto Owlglass, saying: “Good fellow of mine, unto this
wedding must I go, and to-day shall I not return home again. Do thou,
therefore, labour diligently, and bind me these four table boards most
cunningly together with glue.” And Owlglass answered, and said unto him:
“Yea; but which of these belong together?” Then laid the master the
table boards together as he would have them joined, and gat him forth
with his wife unto the wedding.

Then did our Owlglass, that pious man, diligently go to work, and, after
his manner of doing all things wrong, took the four table boards, and
bored holes in them, and laid them one upon the other. Then set he the
glue-pot on the fire, and heated it, and with the brush glued all the
boards together, and carried them up stairs unto the top of the house,
and put them forth out of the window to dry, and then kept he holiday
all the eventide. And at night cometh the master home, and well had he
drunken at the festival. Then spake he unto Owlglass, and said unto him:
“How hast thou laboured during the day?” And Owlglass answered, and
said: “Lo! my good master, verily have I done that which thou didst bid
me to do, and joined the boards together with glue, and then made I an
early holiday at eventide.” And therewith was his master right well
pleased and content; and he said unto his wife: “In good sooth is this a
most excellent serving-man, and he doth with great diligence fulfil that
which I have commanded him. Therefore must we hold him in great honour
and esteem.” These words spoken, he gat him to bed.

And when that it was day he arose, and so did also Owlglass; and the
master bade Owlglass that he should bring unto him the table that he had
made. Then went Owlglass unto the loft, and brought down the boards all
glued together and marred. And when that the master saw how the work was
spoiled, he said unto Owlglass: “Where didst thou learn the art of
carpenter’s work?” And Owlglass answered, and said: “Wherefore ask ye me
this thing?” Then said the master: “Forasmuch as thou hast marred me
much costly wood in thy labour.” When that Owlglass heard this he was
greatly moved, and said: “Nay; but, master, I did only that which ye
commanded, and if that I marred the wood, it is thy fault, not mine.”
Then was the master right wroth, and said unto him: “Thou knave, get ye
forth from my house, and be gone from my workshop; for of thy work have
I no profit.” Thus departed Owlglass, and very little thanks earned he
for his labour.




                     The Sixty and Ninth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass did hire himself unto the master of a saw mill._


As Owlglass journeyed on from place to place, it fortuned that he passed
hard by a saw-mill, at a time when the men were diverting themselves,
and eating their suppers, the which a maiden servant had brought unto
them. Owlglass then conferred with the men, and told them of his many
marvellous adventures, the which he was not unmindful of extolling.
Thereat came the master, and listened with an attentive ear. Now, it
happened, that the manners of Owlglass pleased the master of the
saw-mills much, and he took great delight in his merry jests. Then
Owlglass told him he was a carpenter, and had also worked in saw-pits,
which caused the master to move him to tarry, for he might have as much
work there as it pleased him to do. Thereat did Owlglass consent unto
him; and in order that the bargain might at once be shewn of effect, he
sate himself down, and did eat of the supper; nor did he seem after that
in any wise strange at that house, but did eat with so much appetite,
that in truth it appeared unto all as if he had eaten of that fare all
his life.

Thereafter did they depart unto their work again, and Owlglass had to
carry heavy oaken stems up unto the saw-mill, the which did not agree
with him in the wise that meat and drink always did. Soon, therefore,
was he aweary of this labour, and he cast about in his mind how
cunningly he might become quit thereof. So when it came to pass that his
work-fellows set a huge block of oak over the pit, and began to saw it,
drawing the saw each way, Owlglass spake unto them, saying: “What is
that I see ye do? Wherefore pull ye the saw so as if each would have it
alone. In my country, every man hath his own labour; but ye labour not
to do any good purpose in pulling away the saw each from the other. But
I will shew unto you a simple way by which ye can profitably labour.”
Therewith took he the axe in his hand and brake the saw in two pieces,
and said unto them: “Now can ye each labour in comfort without getting
into anger.” Then ran the workmen unto the master to tell him how
Owlglass brake the saws; and when the master came to demand money for
his saws, had Owlglass departed thence.




                       The Seventieth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass became a maker of spectacles, and perceived that
                          trade was very bad._


Angry and contentious were the monarchs and electors, and there was no
Roman Cæsar or king all this while. And it came to pass, that the Count
of Supplenburg was chosen to be Roman king; yet were there others who
with might desired to enter into the empire. Therefore was it, that the
newly chosen Roman king had to sit down before Frankfort with a large
army for the space of six months, and there lie in wait for some one to
beat him off. And as with him abode there much folk, both foot and
horse, Owlglass bethought him within himself: “Lo! now among the king’s
people shall thy affairs be most profitably advanced; and now will I get
me up, and among the many strange lords which be there, will I make
happy fortune; for of money will these gentles bestow not a little upon
me.” Then did he according to his words, and gat him up, and departed on
his way. And all the great folk of all countries came together there.
And in the Wetterau by Friedberg it came to pass, that the Bishop of
Trier, with his folk, encountered our noble Master Owlglass by the way,
as he journeyed on toward Frankfort. Now Owlglass was curiously
apparelled; and the bishop—who, like unto most meddling priests,
delighted much in prying into all matters—asked of Owlglass what manner
of man he was, and in what way he earned his living.

Then opened Owlglass his mouth, and spake unto the bishop, and said unto
him: “Most reverend lord and father, a maker of spectacles am I, and
from Brabant do I fare. And in that country do people so clearly see,
that I can by my trade win nothing. Therefore do I journey in search of
work, the which I might do because trade is bad.” Then said the bishop:
“Of a truth believe I not that which thou sayest unto me. For thy trade
should wax greater and greater every day, for as much as people now grow
more shortsighted, and see less and less that which is before them. Thus
do folk require many spectacles.” To him replied our noble master after
this wise: “Yea, my noble lord; but there is one thing that destroyeth
our handicraft, and that would I tell you, but that you would with great
scorn reject my saying, and with anger visit me.”

And the bishop answered, saying: “Nay, to the crying out of the people
are we well used. Say freely on that which thou wouldst say.” Then said
Owlglass: “Noble and reverend lord, one thing is there the which doth
mar our handicraft altogether, and I fear me greatly, that, with all
obeisance unto thee, it will utterly ruin and destroy it. For that ye
and other great lords, popes, cardinals, bishops, Cæsars, kings,
princes, counsellors, governors, and judges, now look rather through
your fingers, than after any other wise. And thus think ye your sight
long and true, and therefore buy ye not of such poor artizans as we be.
And of old time read we, that men which are reputed learned did with
much diligence read, study, and explore the mysteries of wisdom, so that
their eyes grew faint and weak, in order that thereby no evil might
arise unto the people; and at that time was our trade yet good. In the
like manner did the parsons most carefully read and study; but now is
every one so learned, that, without looking upon any book, doth he know
everything, and by his inward wisdom perceiveth he all that he would
know. Thus is our trade marred. Now run I from one land unto another,
and nowhere can I find any work; for even hath this reached so far into
the hearts of men, that the very boors do ape and imitate their betters,
and would be so wondrous wise.” Without gloss perceived the bishop good
Master Owlglass his text, and spake unto him fair words, and said:
“Behold now, come thou with us unto Frankfort, and there will we mend
thy trade, and recompence thee richly for thy pains, and to thee shall
be given our dress and arms; for truly art thou worthy to be with us.”

Thus did the bishop reward Owlglass, and chose the vagabond for his
fellow, and in right fellowship were they the twain; and from the
Church, the which Owlglass despised, gat he at last great comfort. For
that which now with great contempt we put away, may anon be of great
worth and advantage. So he abode with the bishop until the count was
confirmed emperor, and then departed again into Saxony.




                    The Seventy and First Adventure.

    _How that Owlglass of a boor at the fair of Gerau took leather._


[Illustration]

In the town of Gerau was there a fair, and from all the country side and
parts both far and near, came folk in great multitude exceeding many, to
buy and to sell and to chaffer. All manner of ware might ye behold
there; but (O good fortune!) in especial was there no lack of leather,
and almost every boor which came unto that place bought of leather a
roll or twain. But the crowd of folk pushing hither and thither, each
contending and striving with each, was so great, that it was hard to
tell which owned any special roll of the good leather they had bought.

And among the good folk which came unto that place was our worthy and
trusty Master Owlglass, and he came with the crowd, and was greatly
contented therewith. And, behold, there came before him a boor with a
roll of leather; and Owlglass perceived what an excellent knavery could
be practised. So took he a needle and thread with speed, and deftly
sewed a corner of the leathern roll unto his own doublet. In no short
space of time did he with his hands pluck by force the piece of leather
from the boor, and turned him about, and departed another way among the
folk. Thereat marvelled the boor with great marvel, and stood still; but
in a little while thereafter departed he after Owlglass, and took him,
and said: “Thou knave, thou hast from me stolen my leather.” But
Owlglass answered, and said unto him gently: “Nay, friend, thou art
unjust towards me. Seest thou not that the leather is mine, for it is
sewed unto my coat, so that none may steal it. And hadst thou done so
likewise, then couldst thou not have lost thy leather.” And the boor
believed the words of Owlglass, and departed elsewhere to seek the
leather he had lost.




                   The Seventy and Second Adventure.

 _How that at Hildesheim Owlglass did hire himself unto merchant to be
             his cook, and what tricks he played unto him._


As thou goest down that street at Hildesheim which leadeth from the
Haymarket, dwelt, on a time, a rich merchant, and he did come forth unto
the gate, and would have entered into his garden. And he passed along,
and behold, he found Owlglass lying in a green field, and he greeted him
and spake unto him, and would have known of him what manner of man he
was, and in what wise he earned his bread. Then with hidden knavery
answered Owlglass unto him, and said: “I am a cook, yet have I now no
service.” And the merchant said unto him: “If that thou would be pious
and diligent, would I myself hire thee, and give unto thee new clothes;
for my wife doth every day most bitterly cry out touching the cooking.”
Then did Owlglass, with great sincerity, promise and vow unto him
obedience. Thereafter hired him the merchant, and asked him what his
name might be? And Owlglass answered, and said: “PAN-CRA-TI-US.” The
merchant said: “Of a truth is this name very long; behold, one cannot
with brief time speak it. Thy name shall be Crazy.” And Owlglass
answered: “Yea, most excellent master, so mote it be, for it is all one
to me, what I am called.” Then did the merchant approve him, and said to
him: “Behold, thou art a servant in whom I can have pleasure. Follow me,
therefore, and we will get unto my garden before the town, and there
gather herbs, and carry home with us young chickens, for on the next
Sunday have I guests coming, and I would fain give unto them good
cheer.” Owlglass followed him unto the garden, and there cut they
rosemary, to make a stuffing for the chickens, after the Italian mode;
and they took of onions, and of other herbs good store, and thereto of
eggs, and departed, and came home again.

And when the good wife looked upon the strangely apparelled Owlglass,
she said unto her husband, and asked him: “What manner of man have ye
here? Would ye waste our bread on such a fellow?” And the merchant
straightway answered and said: “Be content good wife; to thee shall he
be obedient. Lo! he is a good cook.” And the wife replied unto him:
“Yea, good man, I am content, and goodly messes shall he cook for us.”
Then said the merchant: “To-morrow shall ye see how bravely he can
cook.” And he called Owlglass, and said unto him: “Crazy!” Then spake
Owlglass: “Master!” “Go thou and take the meat sack, and follow me unto
the shambles, for I would buy meat for the dinner.” Then followed
Owlglass his master, and the meat was bought accordingly. Then the
merchant enjoined Owlglass, and said unto him: “Behold, take thou the
meat and set it me down where it may slowly become cooked, in a cool
place, so that it be not burned. And the other meat set me down
likewise.” Owlglass answered: “Yea,” and rose up early the next morning,
and some of the meat put he unto the fire to roast; but the other put he
upon the spit, and laid it in the cellar between two butts of Einbeck
beer, so that it could not be burned.

And when the friends of the merchant entered, among them was the town
clerk, and many other worthy folk; and the merchant went unto Owlglass,
and said unto him: “How doth the meat fare? Hast thou done as I told
thee.” “Yea,” said Owlglass, “that have I. For no cooler place in all
thy house could I find than the cellar, and there lieth the meat upon a
spit between two casks of Einbeck beer.” “But is it not ready then?”
asked the merchant. “Nay,” said Owlglass, “I wist not that ye would have
it.”

And then came the guests, and the merchant told them how Owlglass had
put the meat in the cellar; and thereat laughed they greatly at the
merry jest, and so was Owlglass excused. But the good wife was not
content therewith by reason of the guests, and besought her husband that
he would let him go, for well saw she that he was a knave. Then said the
merchant: “Dear wife, behold! I fain would have his services to assist
me when that I go unto the town of Goslar; be patient, and when that I
return thence will I bid him depart in God’s name.” And they sate and
made good cheer, and drank good wine, and had much comfort; and at
eventide the merchant called for Owlglass, and said unto him: “Toll,
prepare thou the coach and smear it right well, for to-morrow will we
depart unto Goslar, and with us doth ride that good priest, Master Henry
Hamenstede, for there abideth he, and will go with us.” Then said
Owlglass unto his master: “Yea, he would do his bidding.” And he
inquired of him, saying: “What manner of unction shall I use to smear
the coach withal?” The merchant cast down a shilling for him to take,
and said unto him: “Go ye straightway and buy ye cart grease, and that
unction will serve thee as well as any other.” And the obedient Owlglass
did, therefore, according unto the words of his master.

When that all men had gat them to bed, stood our Master Owlglass and
smeared the coach within and without with the cart grease the which he
had bought, and on that spot where his master sate smeared he the most.
In the morning arose his master, and came with the priest unto the
coach, and commanded that he should put the horses unto the coach; and
that also did Owlglass. And then departed they in the coach; and as they
went forward, the grease with the which Owlglass had greased the seat
began to smell with no sweet savour, and the priest opened his mouth,
and spake unto the merchant, saying: “Lo! what is this? There is a
savour in this coach which savoureth not of a goodly savour. And when
that I would hold me unto the sides of the coach, for as much as it
jolteth and jarreth me, then are my hands covered over with grease, the
which love I not.” Then commanded they Owlglass that he should stop, and
then told they him that of a truth were they smeared all over with
grease, and with grievous anger visited they our good master.

[Illustration]

Then cometh by a peasant with a load of straw, going unto the market; of
him bought they sundry bundles, and they wiped the coach, and all their
clothes, and again gat them in. And the merchant spake with great anger
unto Owlglass, and said unto him: “Thou evil and most beguiling knave,
what is this thing which thou hast done? Get ye unto the town gallows
with all speed.” And Owlglass did as he was commanded, and when that he
came unto the gallows tree, he stayed the coach, and unharnessed the
horses thereof. Then cried the merchant unto Owlglass, with a loud
voice: “What is this other thing which thou hast done, thou knave?” And
Owlglass said: “Of a truth bid ye me drive unto the town gallows, and
there stand we. I thought that here would ye rest.” Then looked the
merchant and perceived the place where they stood, and the gallows
thereby. What could these worthy men do? Was it not the best to laugh
thereat as they might. So laughed they; but the merchant said unto
Owlglass: “Now do thou drive straight forward, and look not round in any
wise.” Then drew Owlglass the pole from out of the carriage, and drave
the horses forward.

And it came to pass, when that they had driven some small distance, that
the fore-part of the coach was from the hinder part loosened, and the
merchant and the priest sate within, and abode standing on the road.
They cried aloud unto Owlglass, but he would not look round, but
departed with the fore-part of the coach and the horse, and cast not his
eyes behind to see what had happened. And though they pursued him, was
it a long time ere they came up with him. Then would the merchant have
killed him, but the priest would not have this done. And when that the
journey was ended, said the merchant’s wife unto him: “What manner of
voyage hast thou had?” And the merchant answered unto her: “Marvellous
strange hath it been; yet have we returned back again with safety.” Then
called he Owlglass, and said unto him: “Hear me what I say, fellow
voyager. This night mayest thou yet remain here with me, and thou mayest
also bravely eat and drink. To-morrow morn do thou rise up and clear me
the house that I may be quit of thee and of thy company. For a knave art
thou wheresoever thou wert born.” Then said the poor and worthy Master
Owlglass: “Dear heart of me! all that is required of me that do I, but
no one giveth me thanks therefor. Yet my service contenteth me not, then
according as thou commandest will I in the morning clear the house and
get me hence.” “Yea, so do thou,” said the merchant.

The next day arose the merchant, and said unto Owlglass: “Do thou eat
and drink until thy stomach is contented, and then get forth from this
house, so that I look not upon thy face again, when that I come from the
church.” But Owlglass held his peace. And when that the merchant had
departed from the house, he began to clear the house, and stools,
benches, tables, and all that he could drag forth took he and cast it in
the street. The wares of the merchant likewise cast he forth, and the
neighbours marvelled greatly what it should signify that all the goods
were thus brought out from the house. And one that was a friend of the
merchant departed and told him, so with great wrath ran he unto his
house, and sware more than in the church he had prayed. And then said he
unto Owlglass: “How cometh it that yet ye are here? Did I not command
thee to go hence?” “Yea, master,” quoth honest Master Owlglass, “I would
fain only have fulfilled your command, for ye enjoined me that I should
clear the house, the which am I not performing? And truly am I glad ye
are returned, for some matters are too heavy for me, and I would crave
your help.” “Let all things lie,” said the master, “I have been at more
charges for them than that they should be cast into the mire. And thou,
get thee unto the evil one, and let me not see thee more.” And Owlglass
lamented and said: “Alas! is it not a marvellous strange thing that
everywhere do I what I am told; yet am I ever chidden for my pains? In
an unfortunate hour must I have come into the world.” Then departed he,
and left the merchant to carry back into his house his chattels and
merchandise. Thereat laughed the neighbours with great content.




                    The Seventy and Third Adventure.

_How that at Greifswald good Master Owlglass came unt the Rector of the
University, and proclaimed himself to be a master in all languages, save
               in one only, to wit, the Spanish tongue._


Now unto the good town of Greifswald, on that stormy sea which is called
the Baltic, came Owlglass on a time. And when that he arrived set he
upon the church doors letters, and upon the University gates also,
proclaiming therein, that of all languages, save one only was he the
master, and he could understand every tongue save one, to wit, the
Spanish. Thereat marvelled the people with great marvel.

When that the Rector saw the letters which Owlglass had set upon the
university gate, he called together his masters, and they conferred
together; and then was it agreed amongst them, that Owlglass should be
bidden to come before them, and that if he could do that which he said,
then would they do him high honour, and entertain, and endue him with
all the dignities of their venerable college; but if that he might be a
deceiver, then would they with great indignity visit him, and command
him to depart out of their town. So appointed they a day for this to be
done. And Owlglass accepted the challenge which the rector and masters
sent him; and the town was busy all the time with gossips here and
gossips there, talking of the marvellous professor which had come. And,
after the manner of gossips, did they make two where before was one; and
of the foreign master was great conference and noise.

When that the day had come for this wonderful disputation and
examination, there assembled together the rector and the masters, the
chief councillors of the town and the most considerable citizens; and
then entered to them Owlglass, who was attired in like manner unto them,
with gown and grave look. And the rector bade him, that he should sit on
a stool in the midst of the assembly, over against him. And Owlglass
signified unto him, that now would he fain be examined. Then arose the
rector, and, with much gravity, spake unto him, and addressed him in the
Latin tongue. And Owlglass said to him: “Most noble rector, but one
language in the world have I not learned, the which language is Spanish;
and now that thou speakest unto me, it appeareth unto me that thy words
savour of that tongue.” Then the rector said unto him, that truly was
Latin like unto Spanish, yet was it not Spanish, and, therefore, should
he have known. But Owlglass said: “Nay; but if any tongue were like unto
Spanish, then shut he his ears; for that it was great shame unto the
Christian world, that yet should in Spain such vile unbelievers be as
the Moors and their black king.” So by reason of his fervour excused
they Owlglass. Then stood up the rector, and spake unto him in the Greek
language. And Owlglass answered, that unto him it sounded like Spanish.
And the rector said unto him: “If that thou knowest all languages, then
must thou truly also know the Greek tongue.” “That,” quoth Owlglass, “is
the reason why unto me it sounded like unto Spanish. For of old time
were the Greek nations idol worshippers, and bowed down unto senseless
stocks and stones; and shame were it that Christian man should speak
such a tongue.” Then did the assembly praise Owlglass with great praise.

A third time arose the learned rector, and spake unto Owlglass; and this
time spake he Italian. And Owlglass said unto him: “Behold, that too is
like Spanish, and I must hold my peace.” And the rector told unto him
that it was Italian. “Shame should it be,” said Owlglass, “that I should
speak the language of brigands and robbers.” And again praised the
assembly the wisdom of the new professor. And the rector spake unto him
in the French. “Marvellous like unto Spanish,” cried Owlglass. “Nay, but
it is the French,” said the rector. “Then marvel I no longer,” said
Owlglass; “for the French would everywhere continually have more land;
and the mountains which lie betwixt France, Navarre, and Spain, would
they fain have cast into the sea.” Then spake the rector to him in
English. “That tongue likes me not; I fear me it is Spanish,” quoth
Master Owlglass. The rector told him that it was English. “Let me hear
no more on’t,” answered he; “for in England is mist and fog and snow, so
that there be no marvel if that it sound like Spanish or any other. Give
me,” he said unto the rector, “the honest German tongue, for that must
for ever be a noble tongue and a useful.” And the assembly had great
content with Owlglass; for they perceived, that truly he was a master of
languages, and understood not the words so much as the intent, and that
he judged of the lands by the tongues used by the inhabitants thereof.
For truly, my masters, all languages are like each unto the other; for
in every one will ye find liars, cozeners, knaves, cutpurses, deceivers,
and beguilers, in number a great multitude. So with honour departed
Owlglass.




                   The Seventy and Fourth Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass did at Wismar become a horse-dealer, and beguiled a
                               merchant._


By the water at Wismar most knavishly did Owlglass beguile a
horse-dealer. For unto that place came a horse-dealer, and he bought no
horse unless by a certain thing he learned whether the horse was long to
live. And thus did he: when that he had bargained and the price was
fixed, he seized the horse by the tail, and marked, by the plucking of
the tail, whether he would long live or no. For if the horse had a long
tail, and he plucked him thereby, and the hair was weak, then judged he
the horse would not long live. Then bought he not that horse. An if the
tail were firm in the horse, then did he buy it, and believed truly that
it would long live and had a hardy body. For this was a common saying at
Wismar, and in it believed all people which abode there. Of this saying
heard Owlglass, and upon it meditated he a great knavery; for he held it
to be a thing most grave, that all error should from the folk be taken,
for Owlglass would have no beguiler of the people but himself; and, my
masters, was not this our good master an exemplar unto many which even
unto this day have followed in his footsteps?

In the black art was our master also well grounded; therefore with rosin
and blood made he a tail unto a horse, the which had no tail, and
therewith gat he him to market, and there did he bid to the folk dear
enough so that none would buy it. And the merchant, which plucked the
horses by the tail, after that came by, and Owlglass offered it unto him
at cheap rate, in all good conscience. Then the merchant looked upon the
horse that it was fair, and in truth worth the money which Owlglass
demanded therefor. So he came thither, and desired to pluck it by the
tail. Now Owlglass had so wrought the tail, that if peradventure the
dealer so plucked, the tail would therewith stay within his hand, and it
should seem as if he had plucked it forth. And so also it came to pass.
Then stood the merchant with the tail, and was abashed; and Owlglass
cried with a loud voice: “Behold the knave, he hath plucked my horse by
the tail, and lo! he hath plucked it out, and my horse hath he marred.”
Then ran the townsfolk, and held the merchant, and would not let him
depart until that he had satisfied Owlglass with ten crowns for the
damage unto the horse. Then Owlglass went on his way rejoicing.

[Illustration]




                    The Seventy and Fifth Adventure.

     _How that Owlglass wrought a great knavery upon a pipemaker at
                               Lüneburg._


At Lüneburg abode a pipemaker, and he once had been a pedlar, and, with
a pack, had trudged many a league; and this man fortuned to sit drinking
his beer. And to him entered Owlglass, and much company found he there.
And in jest did the pipemaker bid Owlglass to dine with him, and said
unto him: “To-morrow do thou come unto meat with me, and eat that which
thou wouldst have, an thou art able.” And Owlglass answered: “Yea;” and
took his words to be serious, and the next day came unto the pipemaker’s
house, and would have entered in and eaten at his table. But there found
he that above and below was the door bolted and the windows shut. Then
Owlglass walked up and down before the house a few times, until that the
dinner-hour came; but the door was fast shut all this time, and he
perceived that he had been beguiled of the pipemaker. So he departed
from that place, and said not a word, but held his peace. And it came to
pass, that on the next day Owlglass beheld the pipemaker in the
market-place, and he stood before him, and spake unto him, saying: “Thou
dost bid guests unto the feast, and when that they come, find they the
door fast closed, so that they cannot enter therein.” Then answered the
pipemaker unto Owlglass, and said unto him: “Behold, I bid thee to be my
guest, but with certain words; for I said unto thee that thou shouldst
eat with me, an thou wert able; but that couldst thou not, for when that
thou camest were the doors shut, and thou mightst not enter therein.”
“Truly,” quoth Master Owlglass, “we live and learn. That wist not I
before, so have thou my thanks.” And the pipemaker laughed, and said:
“Yet shalt thou not fast this day. Go thou unto my house, and, behold,
there wilt thou find boiled and roast, and the doors are open. Enter
therein and eat, and in no long time will I follow thee; and thou shalt
be alone, and no other guest but thee will I have.” And Owlglass
meditated within himself, and said, privily: “Bravely goeth this
forward.” Then gat he him unto the pipemaker’s house, and findeth it as
the master said unto him. And the pipemaker’s wife stood cooking by the
fire. Then said Owlglass unto her: “Behold, thy good man is at the
market, and hath received a great fish as a gift, and he desireth that
thou shouldst depart unto him, and help him to carry it home. Meanwhile
will I turn the spit for thee.” The good wife answered Owlglass, and
said: “Alas! good Master Owlglass, that will I do; and with my maid will
I get me quickly unto him, and soon return.” And Owlglass said: “Peace
go with thee.” Then departed the good wife and her maid unto the market,
and as they went forward met they the pipemaker coming towards his
house; and he said unto them: “What do ye here?” And they answered, and
said: “Owlglass came unto us, and bade us hasten unto thee upon the
market, for thou hast had a large fish given unto thee, and thou wouldst
have help to carry it home. And Owlglass hath remained in the house, and
turneth the spit.” And the pipemaker waxed very wroth, and said unto his
wife: “Here is a knavery. Why didst thou not stay within; for he hath
not done this without thereby signifying some deceitful work. Behold, I
have no fish.” Then turned they, and altogether came unto the house; and
while they were conferring together, Owlglass had shut both door and
windows, and that found they when that they came unto the house. Then
spake the pipemaker unto his wife: “Now seest thou what manner of fish
thou shouldest fetch?”

Then beat they upon the door. Thereat came Owlglass behind the door, and
said: “Beat ye the door no longer, for to no one will I open it. The
host said unto me, that I should be alone within the house, and no other
guest would he have but myself. Therefore depart ye, and after dinner
come hither again.” The pipemaker said: “It is true, I said according
unto thy words, but I meant not that it should be thus.” And the
pipemaker said unto his wife: “I’ good faith, let him now eat and drink,
for I have in my pate that which shall reward him for his knavery.”

So the three departed, and abode in a neighbour’s house until that
Owlglass had made an end of eating and drinking. Then set Owlglass to
his labour, and boiled the meat, and roasted the roast, and set it upon
a dish, and brought a stool unto the table, and with great content ate
and drank and made good cheer; and he drank health unto his worthy host,
the pipemaker. And when he had filled himself, then arose he and opened
the door, and set the dishes unto the fire again. Then entered in the
pipemaker, his wife and maid; and he said unto Owlglass: “After this
wise, the which thou hast done, do not honest folk.” But Owlglass
answered and said: “How might it be that I should do otherwise? For,
behold, thou didst say I should be alone and the only guest; and if that
I had let more guests in, shame would it have been to me, for my host
would have brooked it not.” And therewith departed he. Then looked the
pipemaker upon him as he went, and said: “Be not afraid, this matter
will I richly repay unto thee, thou knave!” Thereat said Owlglass: “He
is the best man who is ever the master.” Then in that same hour went the
pipemaker unto the hangman, who also gat money by carting dead horses;
and he said unto him: “At the inn lieth a pious man, named Owlglass, and
this night hath his horse died. This would he have carted away.” And the
pipemaker showed the hangman the house where lodged Owlglass. And the
hangman perceived that it was the pipemaker, and agreed with him that he
would do it, and took his cart and went unto the house. Then said
Owlglass unto him: “What wouldst thou have?” And the hangman answered
Owlglass, and said unto him: “Lo! the pipemaker hath been with me, and
said unto me that thy horse was dead and should be carried away. Is it
truly so?” But Owlglass mocked him, and bade him carry the pipemaker
unto the gallows. Then was the hangman wroth, and departed unto the
pipemaker’s house, and made complaint, and with six shillings did the
pipemaker satisfy him. But Owlglass saddled his horse and rode forth
from the town.




                    The Seventy and Sixth Adventure.

  _How that an old woman mocked the good Master Owlglass when that at
                      Gerdau he lost his pocket._


Of old time lived there at Gerdau, in the Lüneburg country, an aged and
venerable couple, who for fifty years lived there together, being good
man and wife; and had goodly sons and daughters, the which had grown to
ripe age. And it came to pass, that the priest of the town was a merry
good-humoured wight, who loved jolly company; and wherever there was a
cup of wine to be quaffed, there would he fain be. With his parishioners
had he so fitted it, that every boor in the country side did at least
receive him and his cook once in each year; and then stayed he some day
or twain, and made excellent cheer. Now, the two old people had for many
a year kept neither dedication, nor christening, or any feast at which
the priest could have content for his fair round belly; and thereat was
he greatly moved and vexed. Therefore he meditated much within himself,
how that he might bring it about that they should give a feast.

Then sendeth he unto the boor a messenger, and asketh how long that it
had been since he had by Holy Church been married unto his good wife? To
him answered the boor: “Reverend father, so long is it ago, that I have
forgotten how many years it hath been.” And the priest rejoined unto
him: “That such forgetfulness was an evil thing for the salvation of his
soul, and he should strive to remember that thing.” Then did the boor
confer with his wife, and considered the matter; yet could they not find
the true time to tell it unto the priest. Therefore came they both unto
the priest, and were greatly troubled, and entreated of him that he
should give unto them some wholesome counsel wherewithal they might
comfort themselves. Then said the priest unto them: “Forasmuch as ye
know not the time at the which ye were married, will it be best that
next Sunday I marry you again, and then will ye be comforted. Therefore
do ye prepare a feast, and kill an ox, and a sheep, and a pig, and bid
your children and good friends to rejoice with ye on that day, and with
all favour give unto them good cheer; and I promise ye that I also will
be with ye.” Then said the boor: “In good sooth, reverend father, is thy
counsel most comforting unto the spirit. It shall go hard, but I will
have a feast which shall be fitting unto the day; for it would not be
well that after fifty years we should be put forth from the marriage
state.” These words spoken, he departed unto his house, and failed not
to do as the priest had advised him.

And the priest bid unto the feast several of his own friends, other
priests and dignitaries of the most Holy Church. Among these was the
Dean of Epsdorf, who in his stables had always a horse or twain, the
which were not to be despised; and, like unto other priests, he loved
good cheer. And with him had Owlglass served some time. And the dean
said unto him: “Sit ye upon my young horse and ride with me, and to that
are ye right welcome.” To that agreed Owlglass. And when that they were
right merry, and did eat and drink with marvellous content, the old
woman, the which was the bride, sat at the head of the table. And after
so much labour was she tired; so she gat up and departed out of her
house, at the back, down to the river Gerdau, and therein bathed she her
feet. By this time did the Dean of Epsdorf and Owlglass set forth to
ride home; and when that they approached unto her, Owlglass caused his
horse to prance and curvet, that the bride might have content thereof;
and so lustily did he this, that his girdle came unfastened, and his
side-pocket fell down upon the ground. And when that the woman beheld
this, she rose up and took the pocket, and sat down thereupon by the
water. So it came to pass, that when Owlglass had got about a field’s
length from the place where the woman sate, he found that he had lost
his pocket, and therefore turneth he about and cometh again unto Gerdau,
and he saith unto the woman: “Hast thou seen an old pocket anywhere upon
the ground?” And the woman said: “Aye, upon my wedding-day did I find an
old rusty pocket, and that have I yet unto this hour.” And Owlglass said
unto her: “Thy wedding-day? Oho! long since was it that thou wast a
bride! truly must it be an old rusty pocket, such an one will not I
have!” Then said the woman: “Is it this?” but would not give it unto
him; and so cunning might he be, yet gat he not his pocket, and he was
fain to leave it behind him; and at Gerdau it is unto this day, and
thither mayest thou travel if that thou desirest to look upon it.

[Illustration]




                   The Seventy and Seventh Adventure.

              _How that Owlglass gained money by a horse._


On a time was Owlglass very poor; and of all his possessions there
remained unto him nought but his horse; and he was sorely troubled in
his mind, how it might be that he should get him food, lodging, and
raiment. Then came he unto a village where there was a fair, and he gat
him unto the chief inn, and in the stable lodged he the horse, and he
bade the host bring him food to eat, and good cheer of wine. And
according unto his words was it done.

And when he had eaten and drunk, and was no longer hungry, he bethought
him how that he might get him some money. Therefore went he into the
market-place, and there cried with a loud voice, that he had brought
with him the most marvellous horse which had ever been seen, and that
its tail was where its head should be, and in the place of its tail was
its head. And this horse would he for little money show unto the village
folk. Then came they unto him in great multitude, and each gave unto him
some money according to his wealth; and he let them into the stable, and
required of them that they should not in any wise betray him, and this
promised they unto him. Then did he display unto them the horse, and lo!
his tail was tied unto the manger, and his head looked forth the other
way. Then laughed the village folk at the merry jest of Owlglass, and
forgave him the money he had taken from them. Thus gat he store of
money, and departed on his way with great content.




                   The Seventy and Eighth Adventure.

  _How that at Oltzen Owlglass did beguile a boor of a piece of green
          cloth, and caused him to confess that it was blue._


Of roast and boiled was Owlglass most woundily fond at all times,
seasons, and occasions; and for that hunger pinched and griped him, by
reason that honest bread he would never eat, it so befel, that to eat he
must seek diligently for what he would have. Now it came to pass, that
while the fairing was going forward in the good little town of Oltzen,
whither from the Wend country came many, and also from divers other
towns, it came to pass, I say, that the great and beloved Master
Owlglass bent thitherward his steps, with intent to sell of his ware,
which be fool-making and coney-catching, like any other honest merchant
of them all. And truly do ye know, that all goods be most difficult to
sell, and such ware as Master Owlglass possessed not less than other
kind; so it behoved him to walk hither and thither, that he might have
occasions to display that wit and honesty, for the which he was so
famous.

Thereafter as he was, with weary steps—believing that honest trade had
departed clean out of this mad and strange world in which we
be—purposing to turn away, he beheld a country boor, of loutish mien,
chaffering and cheapening with a peddling huckster vagabond, for a piece
of green cloth, the which the boor gat, and therewith set forth toward
home. “Fine work be this,” thought Owlglass unto himself, “that loutish
boors should thus chaffer and cheapen cloth, the which for their betters
was woven! Here be thou arbiter, and of wrongs redresser.” And within
himself took he counsel how that cloth he might himself have, for, as
being the compeer of princes and bishops, it would the better grace his
good and fair personage and trappings. Therefore he sought out the name
of the village unto which the boor was departed, and went and took unto
him a hedge parson, and one other, a loose fellow, and gat him with them
forth from the city, on that road whereby the boor should go; and
bidding the twain to swear in faith and by’r lady to all he might say
unto the country boor, set them in order upon the road, removed some
little space the one from the other, and in such wise lay in wait for
the coming of good master green-cloth boor.

In no long time came that worthy trudging along the road, with great
rejoicing within his heart; for it seemed unto him most brave, that in
good green cloth he should attire himself, like unto such as did with
reviling and hard words take service from him; and he was, in very
truth, right merry at heart, for he loved the colour green, as do all
country wights. Unto him approached Owlglass, and opened his mouth, and
spake unto him, saying: “Lo! what a fine blue cloth hast thou there. Of
a truth it is azure, like the darkening sky which hangeth above our
heads in marvellous mystery. Nay, but such a blue cloth is rarely woven.
Prithee, whence didst thou get it?” And the boor answered, and said unto
Owlglass: “Ne’er a blue cloth be this at all, but a swart green, the
which I bought in the fair of Oltzen.” Then said Owlglass: “Nay, but it
is blue; and thereon will I set twenty silver marks, and let the first
man that cometh by between us twain determine and end the contention.”
Thereat said the boor: “Nay, if that thou be beside thyself and wilt
lose thy money, have with thee. I am content.” So they agreed thereupon.

With a good swinging trot cometh the first of Owlglass’s fellows
trudging along the road, for he spied that the boor had made agreement
with Owlglass. And the boor said unto the voyager: “Hold thou an
instant; we have here a contention betwixt us upon the colour of this
cloth. Say thou the truth if that it be blue or green, and we will
therewith be content.” Then the man spake unto them, saying: “It is, of
a truth, as fine blue cloth as ever eyes of mine beheld.” But the boor
would not agree thereunto, and said: “Nay, but ye are two beguilers,
cheats, and cozeners; green it is, but ye have agreed to deceive me.”
But unto him quoth the wily Owlglass: “Lo! now that it may be perceived
of me, that in this matter I am as innocent as any spotless lamb of the
flock unto which I pertain, and that right and truth is on my side, let
us make fresh agreement. See, hither, with measured steps, cometh a most
reverend priest, who in pious meditation beguileth the weariness of
travel. Let him be judge betwixt us, and by his word be we bound; for if
Holy Church bind us not, then will no ties constrain us within virtuous
paths.” And with such speech was the boor content.

Then when the priest (right good exemplar of all his tribe!) drew nigh
unto them, Owlglass spake unto him, and said: “Reverend father, upon thy
devout thoughts may we for a brief space intrude the base matters of
this outer world; and we beseech thee, determine between this boor and
myself what be the colour of this cloth.” “Nay, son,” quoth the reverend
man, “but that can ye for yourselves most easily behold.” Thereat said
the boor: “Yea, reverend father; but here have we two that would with
knavery constrain me to believe a thing the which is contrary to reason
and justice.” And unto him answered the priest, and said: “What have I
to do with your contentions? So many things there be in this world
which, contrary to reason and justice, find hot believers, men heated
and molten in the furnace of vanity and self-conceit; and would ye
contend over the hue and dye of a cloth? What care I if it be black or
white? That with your own eyes can ye see.” “But, reverend sir,” quoth
Master Bumpkin, “do ye, in the plenitude of your kindness, judge betwixt
us, and say what be the colour of this cloth.” Then the priest said:
“That ye twain may be at peace, and have no grief or ill-will at heart,
or vain rejoicing one above the other, will I say that which ye may so
easily see. The cloth is a deep blue.” And the boor marvelled thereat;
but Owlglass turned round unto him, and said: “Lo! hearest thou what the
good priest sayeth? O Holy and Excellent Church, in the which such true
and faithful men be! O noble and worthy cause, which is upheld by such
instruments of acute and keen temper! Behold, boor, the cloth is mine;
and unto the Church must I pay somewhat of its value, as by decree of
ecclesiastic it hath been awarded me.” Then the boor looked upon the
three with much amazement, and said these words: “O’ my halidom! an if
this man were not an ordained and sanctified priest, I would fain
believe that ye were all liars, intending to cozen me of my cloth with
conspiration and deceit, being three thorough-going knaves; but as I
perceive that ye be a priest, I must put faith in ye whether ye be knave
or no.”

Then he gave the cloth unto Owlglass; but if that he had known
jack-priests as well as thou and I, he had not left it. Yet such is the
world’s way; when the parson doeth justice, the boor must trudge home in
ragged frock.




                    The Seventy and Ninth Adventure.

       _How that Owlglass most strangely gat a potful of money._


Nay but wiles and deceits be many in this world! Nor can it grow better,
or wiser, or nobler, unless the sayings which men, in the fulness of
their hearts and their wine-cups, publish abroad, be regarded and
reflected in the deeds they do the next morning. It fortuned that
Owlglass had been carousing with companions, who, indeed, were neither
worse nor better than was he himself in proper person; but who, for that
he discharged the expenses of the tippling, was extolled to the skies by
ruined gamesters, cunning and lying boon companions,—noble pothouse
friends, whose faces, marred and scored like the table whereon, in grimy
circlets, pot and glass lovingly stand together, would, in after days,
look grimly forth from the tablets of memory, and brand the soul of any
man but such a philosopher as was Owlglass. And elated and ennobled,
besmouched and bemired, by their commendation, he descended from the
throne of the wine-chamber, and set forth to come homeward, where he lay
that night. Philosophy was in his heart beaming with placid face upon
the world; from his countenance looked forth universal love of brother
to brother, in bond, apparently as firm as that of Church, in truth, as
rotten at the core, and Owlglass, in such thoughts as fumy wine
bestoweth, was for a while no longer the roving knave, cheat, and
cozener, but a true man filled full of impotent benevolence, clasping
the world in drunken joy.

Therefore, master mine, marvel not if that in mazy glory, our good
friend and brother journeyed on, and forgat what place it was where he
should lie. And while that the stars ’gan to blink down upon him, he
found that he had departed clean forth from the village, and was nigh
unto another. “Nay,” quoth he, “but here must I find me a lodging, for I
am aweary, and my steps be short and leaden.” So he shook away from
himself the loathly praise and glorifyings of reeling brethren of the
wine-pot, and diligently sought in that village for some house where he
might sleep. But of a truth it was late, and no friendly door stood wide
to let him enter. Coming at last unto the village end, he beheld a
twinkling light, and he took counsel within him what he should do. Then
crept he up privily unto the casement, and lay in wait thereby, and
looked in and beheld how a boor did count the money, the which he had
taken at the mart for a lusty yoke of oxen he had sold. “Nay,” thought
Owlglass, “here be we close by the threshold of avarice, for i’ faith
why should a man sit in the midst of the night to count and finger the
greasy coin, the which by chaffering he hath obtained? Could he not i’
the morning’s light full as happily have set forth the gain?”

Money waxeth neither with counting nor with handling; and yet men tire
not in the reckoning thereof. Better bid farewell unto a shiny Edward
shovel-groat, say I, and let it work its office in many and divers
pouches, than mar its silver beauty with the hot hands of a miser. For
if that money be a great instrument of wicked wills; yet on its course
it encourageth much and great good, and the evil that it doth is weighed
down in the balance by a hundredfold of happiness. Put ye but a penny
forth, my masters, in a faithful device, it will bud, and blossom, and
fructify, and ripen, to the harvest of a thousand pound; but an if ye
bestow it in evil design, it dieth in the hands where ye laid it, nor
enricheth any, save the unsated innkeeper or the lurking thief. And that
avarice is punished by its own miserly griping after gain, shall ye
presently perceive set forth in the true chronicle of Master Owlglass,
his doings and life. For hard by the boor sate his little son; and in
children, mark me, with all their innocence, there be the seeds of
greed; nay, the seeds of every vice and virtue under heaven.

Now he beheld how that his father, with trembling hands, and by a
farthing candle, did count the moneys he had received, and the child
lusted to become possessed of a penny, and besought that he should
bestow it upon him. “Nay,” quoth the other roughly, “this must never be.
What can a child like thee desire to have money for? Hast not food, and
lodging, and raiment, bestowed on thee, and wouldst thou have money
beside. Go to!” And he refused the child the gift which he beseeched of
him. Yet the child would not be discouraged, but again besought his
father, who denied him, and waxed wroth, and spake unto him saying: “If
that thou dost seek to obtain of me aught of this, I will give it unto
the black man without the casement, and put it forth to interest after
that wise.” Yet he wist not that in the darkness of the night lay
Owlglass hidden. Yet did the child, with speech and gesture, entreat a
penny of his father. So, with violent hand, the father swept from the
table all the fair marks he had received, and in an earthen pot bestowed
them and held it forth through the casement, and said: “Here, black man,
do thou take the money.” For he would affright the child. And Owlglass
put forth his hand and took the pot of money; and like an evil doer fled
forth unto the fields therewith rejoicing with an aching heart at the
fortune which had thus come unto him.




                        The Eightieth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass ran great peril of his neck for receiving the pot of
        money, yet gat fifteen shillings in stead of a hanging._


When that Owlglass had, with nimble legs, gat forth with the pot of
money into the fields, and looked about, lo! there was not any man which
followed after him, and thus guilt was its own constable, lashing the
trembling culprit, and driving him forth to seek a bed in the fields,
with stubble for a pillow. Marvel not that none did with hue and cry
pursue good Master Owlglass; for it came to pass that when the boor had
found his pot of money taken, he cried aloud with a great voice, and
spake unto such as from their drowsy pillows would with sleepy head give
heed unto his speech. But for as much as it was well-known to the
worthies which abode in that village, that good master peasant was a
miserly hunks, they cared not at all when that he cried aloud that a
thief had taken his treasure, and fled with it into the night.

Thus did none follow Owlglass until the day dawned, and then search was
diligently made, for in truth men’s hearts, lacking charity in the night
season, do sometimes become strangely moved in the face of morning,—and
search being made, they encompassed Master Owlglass, and set upon him,
and took him and carried him before my good justice of that village, who
was a right worthy and true judge. Then the miserly boor stood forth,
and said: “Last night while that I sate in my chamber and counted my
moneys, this knave lay in wait under the casement thereof, and when that
to fright my child, I put forth my pot of money, he with rascally guile
took it from me, and fled away therewith. And that he had the money that
can he not deny, for when that we took him, he had it in his pouch.”
Then the judge said unto Owlglass: “What hast thou to answer unto this
man? Dost thou confess and make restitution unto him, for this be a
hanging matter, and thou art like to be food for the crows?” Thereat
Owlglass answered and said: “Nay, but I entreat ye that of this boor I
may have some answers touching this matter.” The judge said: “Speak on.”
Then said Owlglass: “Lo! didst thou not open the window and say aloud:
‘Here black man, do thou take the money?’” “Yea,” quoth the boor. “And
was not the night dark?” “In good sooth it was,” answered the boor. “And
in dark night are not all men black?” “I’ faith that is true,” said the
boor. “Then I being a black man, may it content your worship’s
reverence, was bidden to take this boor’s pot of money, the which I
graciously received, and for the which I bestow the thanks of a poor man
upon him.” “Of a truth, thou speakest wisely,” observed the judge, “and
for such deed can I not hang thee; and for as much as thou art a proper
man and of a quick wit, do I free thee, and bestow upon thee these
fifteen shillings; but be thou very heedful to depart forth from this
our village, and come not again by day or by night.” Then the boor
departed homeward and thought it had been better to have bestowed a
penny upon his little lad, than lose the goodly marks by such a rare
coney-catcher as was Owlglass. Yet for this cared Owlglass not a whit;
but set forth with full pouch and merry mood to the next country; and
praised the judge for the just and true judgment he had given.




                    The Eighty and First Adventure.

      _How with good luck Owlglass told many that he had lost his
           money-girdle, and thereby came unto a warm fire._


Now the winter season came, and with white mantle hid the earth, and it
was bitter cold. Yet it fortuned that Owlglass had urgent reason to
travel, for his occasions never happened to keep him in one place or
city for any time. And as the night drew near, Owlglass came unto a
village, and there entered into the inn and the chamber where the guests
and village gossips sate talking around the fire. Our noble master was
covered over with sleet and snow, and the frost had bitten him sore and
his garments held within them icy proofs of the wintry season; yet for
as much as the boors concealed the fire he could not warm himself.
Thereat he cried out lustily for good master host that he should bring
him some wine, the which was readily done. And Owlglass opened his mouth
and spake unto the host after this wise: “Good mine host, I beseech thee
do thou allot unto me a candle in a lanthorn, and one which should go
forth with me unto the road, for there lieth by the way, a money-girdle,
the which I have lost; and though I sought it diligently, yet by reason
of the darkness of the night, could I not discover it.” But the host
answered: “Nay, but this night seek not after it, for where it lieth
shall we find it to-morrow at sun-rise, and there will be no harm come
thereunto.” And he said this, for that he was wily, and would have
sought it himself, and taken it. And the boors which were talking about
the fire, pricked me up their ears, and one by one departed out of the
inn that they might seek the money-girdle, so that at last the chimney
nook was empty, and Master Owlglass might, with comfort, drink his wine
in the warmth, while the others delved and digged in the snow abroad.
When that they were all departed thence, Owlglass discovered the
pleasant jest unto the host, and they laughed hugely, and drank in the
ingle a most joyous cup thereupon.




                    The Eighty and Second Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did at Bremen of the market-women buy milk, and cause
               it to be poured altogether into one tun._


A pleasant jest wrought Owlglass at Bremen. At one season when that he
came thither, he stood on the market, and he beheld that the boors’
women brought great store of milk thereto; and therewith he ’gan to
think what a merry piece of knavery he might perform. Therefore he
tarried awhile until a day on which the market was very full, and much
milk was brought thither, and he fetched him a great tun, the which he
set upon the market-place, and cried aloud unto the boors’ women that
they should turn unto him, for he would buy their milk, and they should
pour it into the tun. And every good wife of the which he took milk he
bade write the measure and price therefor, upon a paper, and then sit
down, for he would pay the money when that the tun was filled.

So the boors’ wives sat in a circle around Owlglass, and waited for
their money, and rejoiced greatly at such a noble milk merchant (for
they knew him not); and it came to pass, that after a while there was
not any other good wife who had milk to sell. Then Owlglass opened his
mouth and spake unto the women, and said unto them these words: “To-day
have I not any money in pouch. And such of ye as cannot abide and give
me credit for a matter of fourteen days, would do best to take forth her
milk again:” and having thus maliciously ended his speech, he hasted to
go away from the market-place. Thereafter contended the boors’ wives
with much anger, and each would fain take her milk out of the tun first,
and in their quarrelings the milk was spilled on the ground and on their
clothes, and in their eyes; and it did most certainly appear as if milk
from the clouds had been rained down. And all the townspeople beheld the
merry conceit, and they were greatly contented with the wit of Master
Owlglass.




                    The Eighty and Third Adventure.

_How that Owlglass spake unto twelve blind men, and persuaded them that
  he had unto them given twelve shillings; and how that they spent the
                 money and came evilly off thereafter._


And, it came to pass, that as Owlglass journeyed hither and thither up
and down in the land, like an uneasy spirit as he was, he came again
unto Hanover, and there he wrought not a few strange things. Therefore
one day as he sate upon his horse beyond the city gate and rode a good
way, there came along the road twelve blind men, the which he
encountered. When that he beheld them he cried aloud unto them: “God
give ye grace, blind men, whence come ye?” Then the company of blind men
stood still and perceived that he sate upon a horse, and by that they
judged him to be an honest gentleman—for respect is always due to one
who is a cavalier; and who rides must needs be honest—so they took off
their hats and saluted him, and spake unto him, saying: “Lo! noble and
worshipful sir, good kind Christian gentleman, we have been within this
city of Hanover; there had a rich man given up the ghost, and at his
funeral feast were alms and baked meats bestowed upon us and other poor
men, as be we. Yet for as much as frost and snow be on the ground, we
were right sorely pinched with the cold.” Then answered Owlglass, and
said unto them: “Ye say truly that it is cold; I fear me that of frost
ye will utterly perish. Now look you, here be twelve shillings, enter ye
again into the city, and get ye unto such an inn, [and he told them what
inn they should seek], and spend ye these twelve shillings for God his
grace and my sake, until that the winter be gone by, and ye be able to
again set forth in comfort upon your voyage.”

Then the blind men stood in great honour and worship of the noble
gentleman’s person, and bowed themselves before him, and gave him their
thanks for his guerdon. For each blind man believed that his neighbour
had received the money, to wit, in the manner that the first thought the
second had it, and the second the third, and the third the fourth; and
after this wise were they all hoodwinked, for not one stiver had
Owlglass bestowed upon them. Thereafter they turned back, and gat them
unto the hostel of the which Owlglass had told them; and when they had
entered in, they spake unto the host, and told him how that it had come
to pass that a good charitable gentleman had encountered them by the
way, and had bestowed upon them twelve shillings, that they might eat
and rejoice during the hard winter, until that spring should come again.

Now the host was a man greedy of gain, and he thought no more upon that
saying, but how he might get the money; and he received them, and never
did he dream within his stupid sconce to ask which had the money in
pouch of them all. But he spake unto them, saying: “Dear and beloved
brethren, ye shall here receive satisfaction, and your afflictions shall
be comforted.” And he made haste to kill and hew down oxen and calves;
and he made ready meats boiled and roast, and set them before the blind
men, who fell to right gladly; and this feasting went forward every day,
until he thought that they had eaten the value of the twelve shillings.

Then he spake unto them, and said: “Dear brethren, ye have eaten the
value of the twelve shillings, methinks, let us therefore reckon.” And
the blind men answered: “Yea;” and spake each unto his fellow, that he
should take forth the twelve shillings, that good master host should be
rewarded. But the one had it not, neither had the other; moreover they
found that not a penny had any man of their company. And the blind folk
sate still and scratched their pates, but found not the twelve shillings
anywhere behind their ears; and they perceived that they had been
beguiled. Then the host saw likewise that he had been cozened of his
charges, and he sate there, and pondered what he should do. For he
thought within himself: “Here be a company of blind rascals, and if that
thou permittest them to depart, then dost thou lose thy charges; and if
that thou keepest them will they eat yet more, and then thou wilt be at
double cost.” So with no more ado he claps me the blind company of dear
brethren into the pig-stye, and there may they make fine cheer with hay
and straw.

At this time, Owlglass ’gan to think,—for with all his malice he had a
good heart:—“Nay, but thy blind men must very nigh have eaten up the
provision thou madest for them, and therefore go thou and seek news of
them.” And he saddled his horse and disguised himself, and rode unto
Hanover, and came unto the inn where the blind men lay. Thereupon, as he
came into the court, and would have bound his horse up in the stable, he
looked, and behold the blind men lay in the pig-stye. Thereat he gat him
into the house, and spake unto the host, and said unto him: “What is
this thing which thou hast done unto these blind men? Wherefore be they
amidst the dirt and mire of the pig-stye? Have ye no bowels of mercy
when ye see the vile fare they eat?” And the host answered him: “Nay,
but I wish that in the water they lay all perished, if only my charges
were paid.” Therewith telleth he unto Owlglass the whole story of the
matter. Owlglass said unto him: “How, sir host, could ye not have a
surety for this debt?” “Alas!” quoth the host, “right gladly would I
have a surety if that it could be—and if that a certain surety be found,
I would set free these poor men forthwith.” Thereat said Owlglass unto
him: “See now, I will go and in this city make quest, if that I can find
some charitable man that will do this thing for thee.”

So Owlglass gat him forth, and came unto the priest of the parish, and
said unto him: “Most reverend and learned sir, hast thou a will to do a
Christian kindness? For lo! I must expound unto thee, that mine host of
the inn where I lie is possessed of an evil spirit within the past
night, and he beggeth hard that ye would exorcise him, and cast out the
evil demon.” The priest answered, and said: “Yea, that I will most
cheerfully; for is it not mine office? Yet must we tarry a day or two;
for with such things is haste greatly to be avoided.” Then quoth
Owlglass: “I will go fetch his wife, that ye may repeat this thing unto
her.” The priest replied: “Yea, bring her unto me, I warrant she shall
be content.” Then departed Owlglass, and gat him to the host, and said:
“I have found for thee a surety in good master parson of the parish.
Give me now thy wife to bear me company unto him; for he will give her
satisfaction.” Thereat was the host right glad, and bade his wife
immediately resort with Owlglass unto the priest; and when they came
thither, Owlglass said: “Behold, reverend sir, here is the woman, wife
unto the host of the which I spake anon. Assure her now as before thou
didst assure me.” And the priest said: “Yea, my good woman; be thou
content. For is it not mine office to do deeds of charity? That which
thy husband seeketh shall be in a short time performed within these few
days.” And the woman was content, and returned again unto her husband,
and said unto him, that the priest would perform the payment duly; and
then was the host glad, and let the blind men depart, and rewarded
Owlglass for his pains; and this last set forth on his journey, and
tarried no longer in Hanover.

The third day after this, the woman went again to master parson, and
demanded of him, that he should pay the twelve shillings. And he asked
her, if her husband had said this thing unto her; and she said: “Yea.”
Thereat he observed, “that such was the way with evil spirits; they
would always have money.” But the woman said: “There be no evil spirits
here; pay ye the charges, and therewith are we ended.” The priest quoth
thereat: “I was admonished that your good man was possessed of an evil
spirit, the which he would fain have cast forth; now this will I do, but
of money know I nothing.” To him straightway answered the goodwife:
“Nay, but this is the fashion with liars and shufflers; when that money
is to be paid, they would with knavery escape. If that my husband be of
an evil spirit beset, ye shall surely be advised thereof,” and therewith
ran speedily unto her husband, and told him what the parson said.

After this took the host halberts and pikes, and ran with a company unto
the parsonage. And when the parson beheld it, he cried aloud, and
assembled his neighbours, and said unto them: “Do you, I charge ye, help
me against this madman, who of an evil demon is sore possessed.” And the
host said unto him: “Priest, remember thy surety, and do now pay me.”
But the priest stood and blessed himself, and payed not at all. Then
would the host have with a goodly staff stricken the priest, but that
the boors came and parted the twain with great difficulty. But, so long
as the host lived, he was ever seeking payment from the priest; and the
priest affirmed that he had an evil spirit, and of that would he free
him, but of money owed he unto him not a doit.

Thus fell out the end of the excellent adventure of Owlglass with the
blind men, the host, and the parson.




                    The Eighty and Fourth Adventure.

         _How that in a city of Saxony Owlglass sowed knaves._


Knaves abound in many places; there be knaves of every degree: there be
black knaves, white knaves, copper-coloured knaves, red knaves, and
yellow knaves. There be knaves which ride in coaches and waggons; there
be knaves on horseback; there be knaves on foot. There be knaves of high
degree; there be knaves of low estate. There be knaves in Holy Church,
devout knaves, which cheat heaven in their prayers, and earth in their
tithes; there be knaves out of Holy Church, which, for wise reasons, do
simulate a contempt thereof; there be knaves which buy, and there be
knaves which sell; there be knaves which, with honest mien, declare
themselves no better than they be, for thou in thy vanity condemnest
them not, but thinkest them better than their speech declareth, and yet
be these very knaves, sorry knaves, and shallow knaves. There be knaves
which bear rule, and there be knaves over which rule is borne; there be
knaves which bow the knee to knavish kings, princes, and lords; and
there be knaves which set foot forth against all rulers, princes, and
governors. There be knaves which help ye with seeming good fellowship,
and there be knaves which, by opposing ye, do ye true service; there be
knaves which amuse ye; there be knaves which laugh in turn at that which
ye do: lo! indeed, not in this world can ye find any place which is
devoid of knaves, creeping like caterpillars through your gardens, and
destroying your fairest flowers, to fatten and batten, and crawl and die
like other things.

Knaves sit smiling by your own hearthstone, deluding ye with love and
fair service—your children be knaves, your fathers were knaves;—for in
this world are secrets hidden—and, indeed, are we unto ourselves not
true, but knaves altogether, excusing, palliating, concealing, hugging,
with not a little fear and trembling, our favourite vices, or our evil
desires. O what a discourse of knavery would a history of our mad world
be, what quaking terrors of evil doings, what fierce self-destructions,
what insane flight from self-condemning would be unfolded! Let us
rejoice, my masters, that a little spice of honesty leaveneth the whole
lump and maketh life endurable, our meat not poison, our porridge not
altogether rat’s-bane. And truly this chronicle affirmeth, averreth, and
with loud voice saith, that an if such words as these had been set down
in courteous phrase, and not hurled from the priest’s pulpit or babbled
from the fool’s booth, ye had not received, but had denied utterly the
gracious assent which I do perceive sitteth upon your heart; thus,
therefore, like all other things, is this chronicle but a knavish
matter.

Of a truth, it may be most certainly believed, that to such a world it
was necessary and fit, that a pitying eye and brain should see, and
purpose despatch, from highest heaven to insulted earth a Prince of
peace and justice. But in this chronicle, as in this world, is all
honesty discarded; for the world is so turned topside t’ other way, that
it may not be that we should distinguish gentle from simple, wise from
foolish, honest man from knave. “Yet be of good cheer,” saith One who is
higher than any of us; “I have overcome the world.”

Yet in one little town of Saxony espied Owlglass, when that he was
therein, that not within its walls there could be a knave; yet might
this be, for that he was strange unto the devices and nature of the folk
which dwelt therein; and he fell into a deep contemplation and musing
upon such a marvellous matter. And he took his way beside of the river
Weser, the more at ease to reflect thereover. For while that he abode in
that city, beheld he all that was done by the folk therein; and so
strangely honest appeared their dealings, that he was tired and sick at
heart with folk among whom he could not have any profit. And as he took
his way along the bank of the Weser, he looked, and, behold! of pebbles
shiny and clear, rolled in mass by the stream, was there a goodly heap;
and he bethought how that of old some wondrous one did, by casting
stones over his shoulders, produce men and women, the which in knavery
excelled greatly. “Nay,” quoth he thereat; “why should not in this place
a like marvel happen?” and with no more ado, he catcheth me up a sackful
of these so shining stones, and entereth with great joy and content into
the city.

Then in that street which is hard by over against the town-house, he
beginneth to sow his crop of marvellous nature; but the people came
running unto him and inquired of him, and fain would know what it might
be that he was doing. “Why,” quoth noble Master Owlglass, “in this town
here be ye so woundily honest, that for fear ye should be altogether
without praise for your virtue, I sow ye a crop of knaves.” With that,
my masters, ye should have heard the outcry and hallabaloo which the
burghers did make. “Nay, nay!” they cried, “this city be, indeed, so
crammed with an abundance of knaves that an if ye sow not honest folk,
we shall surely perish.” But Owlglass said: “That may not be, for in
this town have grown virtues so long that ye must change the crop, or
let the ground be for awhile fallow.” Then they laid hands upon him and
took him, and bade him answer his deeds before the town council. And the
town council admonished him, and would have none of his crop, and bade
him therewith carry his seed-sack out of their bounds. So Owlglass gat
him forth, and entered into another city; but the fame of what he bare
had been noised abroad, and so entirely did they detest knavery, and
loathe cheats, that neither to eat nor to drink nor to tarry for rest
would they permit Owlglass. Aweary of such ware, at last he entered into
a ship, and would have departed by water, but the seed brake the bottom
through, and he was nigh drowned; so into the River Weser returned the
stones he had taken; and unto this day, whenever that any man is seized
of great virtue, they give unto him water of the Weser to drink, the
which strangely promoteth chousing, coney-catching, and gulling.

Thus endeth a great feat of our modern Deucalion.




                    The Eighty and Fifth Adventure.

 _How that in the good city of Hamburg Owlglass hired him unto a barber
            and went through the casement unto his service._


On a time came Owlglass unto Hamburg and there stood upon the
Hop-market, and gazed hither and thither as he was wont to do. And unto
him came up a barber, and spake unto him and said: “Lo! what seekest
thou, and whence comest thou?” Then Owlglass said: “Of a truth, I come
now straightway from the last place in the which I abode.” Upon this
saith the barber: “What art thou for a workman?” And Owlglass said: “I
am a barber, an it please ye.” Thereat the master hired him, and spake
unto him saying: “Mark me, dost thou see yon house over against us with
the casement down unto the ground.” “Yea,” quoth the man. “Then do thou
straightway enter in there, and soon will I follow,” said the master.
“Most truly,” said our worthy Owlglass. Then he gat him unto the house,
and brake the casement all in pieces, and entered in thereby, and
saluted the barber’s wife, who sate spinning within, and spake courteous
words and said: “God bless this handiwork.” But the barber’s wife was
afeared, and cried: “What labour and handiwork be this that thou dost,
breaking me the casement after this wise? The foul fiend seize thee,
loon!” “Nay,” quoth Owlglass, “impute not the marring of the casement
unto me, except as diligent service, for your good man bade me enter in
thereby, and I ever perform that which is enjoined me.” Then the woman
said: “Truly, a faithful servant is he who marreth his master’s
substance!” But Owlglass said: “Should not a servant perform his
master’s bidding?” With that, during such conference betwixt the twain,
cometh the master, and looked upon the broken casement. And he said unto
Owlglass: “What is this? Couldst thou not enter by my house door, and
leave me the casement whole? What be the cause that thou shouldst thus
enter by a window.” “Nay,” answered Owlglass, “beloved master, ye bade
me look upon the tall window and there enter in; and I did but according
to thy words.” Thereat was the master content, for he considered within
himself: “I can but from the money of his hiring take what will pay the
charges of making my casement whole.”

Thereafter they went forward in comfort for some days. Then did the
barber enjoin Owlglass that he should take a razor, and he instructed
him, and said: “Now do thus evenly with the edge grind me the back, so
that no notches be.” And Owlglass answered: “Yea, most willingly.” And
after a season had gone past, the barber cometh privily behind Owlglass
to see after what manner he was performing his labour, and Owlglass had
ground the back as sharp as the edge, and marred the work altogether. So
the master spake unto him saying: “What vile thing is this that thou
dost?” And the other to him answered: “I do not any vile thing? But only
according to thy words; didst not bid me to grind the back evenly with
the edge? And so do I.” Then did the master wax very wroth, and said
unto him: “Lo! get thee forth hence, and return in manner that thou
didst come.” Owlglass answered him: “Yea,” and taking his bundle,
springeth me forth through the casement again, and breaketh it, and so
departeth. And though the barber was lithe and active, as be the fashion
with barbers, yet could he never seize Owlglass, who, indeed, was a
match for a good fleet runner.




                    The Eighty and Sixth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass did cause the host of the inn at Eisleben to be beset
with great terror, by showing unto him a wolf, of the which he professed
                               no fear._


In Eisleben there dwelt an innkeeper who was mocker of others, and who
thought that of all great hosts he was the exemplar and flower. Unto him
came Owlglass in the winter time; and he abode in the inn with him while
that the snow was on the ground. And while that the night was dark,
there came three merchants from Saxony unto the inn, who would fain come
unto Nürnberg. The host, who was swift of speech, spake unto them, and,
with ready words, said: “Whence come ye folk so late, and why have ye
tarried so long by the way?” And the merchants answered him, and said:
“Behold, master host! be not wroth with us by reason of our lateness; a
wolf did lie in wait for us by the way and attacked us, and with him had
we to contend and beat him off; from that cause is it that we be so late
with thee.” And when that the host heard their words, he mocked them,
and said unto them: “Great shame is it that ye do let yourselves be
stayed by a wolf—for if that I met two wolves in the field, I would
alone contend with them and slay them; little account would I make of
such a pair! And there were of ye folk three people, and by a single
wolf were ye affrighted.” And thus continued the host to mock them the
whole even through until that they gat them to bed.

All this while sate Owlglass by the fire, and heard what was said. And
when that the night was far spent, in the which this host so despised
the merchants, they gat them to bed and Owlglass lay with them in one
chamber; and then conferred the merchants one with the other, as to how
it might be brought about that the host should be rightly recompenced
for his mockery and scorn, so that they might make him to hold his
peace, for that afterwards they might take their ease in the inn. Then
did Owlglass open his mouth, and spake unto them, saying: “Lo! an it
please ye, beloved friends, truly do I mark that our host is nought but
a vain speaker. Now, if that ye are content to hear me what I would say
unto ye, I will so do that never more shall he speak unto ye of the
wolf.” Thereat rejoiced the merchants with great content, and did
promise him money, the which should be given unto him; and his
reckoning, likewise would they pay. Then he bade them depart freely unto
their business; but as they returned, he would have them lie at that
same inn, and he would then also be there present, and he would cause
the host to hold his peace, thereafter in the matter of the wolf. To
that agreed they, and gat them ready for their voyage on the next day,
and paid their charges and those of Owlglass likewise, and they all rode
away therefrom, and the host called after them with mockery: “Be ye
sure, ye merchants, that no wolf doth beset ye by the way.” But they
answered, and said unto him: “Great thanks do we give unto thee; and if
the wolves devour us, then come we not hither again.”

Then did Owlglass ride unto the hunt, and chased the wolves, and by God
his grace killed he one, and this one did he put in the ice until that
it froze hard. And when that it was about the season that the merchants
should again come unto Eisleben unto the inn, Owlglass took the dead
wolf within a sack, and gat him unto the inn according unto his promise,
and there found he the three merchants. At supper time did the host yet
mock the three merchants about the wolf; but they said that of a truth
it had so happened unto them as they had said unto him. But the host
continued to speak words of vain import, and declared unto them, that if
he did meet two wolves in the field, he would shake the one by the head
until that he died, and then would cut the other in pieces.

Thus went all conversation forward, until that they departed unto bed.
Yet kept Owlglass silence, and spake no word until they had entered into
their chamber and shut the door. Then he opened his mouth, and said unto
them: “Lo! gentlemen and good friends, do ye still keep watch for a
space, and put ye not out the light.” And when the host had gat him to
bed with all his folk, Owlglass crept privily from the chamber, and bare
with him the dead wolf, the which was frozen hard, and carried it into
the kitchen, and with sticks supported it that it stood upright; then
did he open its mouth wide, and therein set two children’s shoes, and
thereafter gat he him unto the chamber where he abode with the
merchants. In no long time thereafter cried he aloud for the host. Then
did the host hear him, for yet was he not asleep; and he called unto him
and demanded what he would have. Then they cried aloud unto him: “Alas!
worthy master host, send unto us the maid or the man, for of thirst
shall we else die!”

When that the merchants cried aloud after this manner, the host waxed
very wroth, and said: “Even thus is it ever with the folk from Saxony,
for by day and by night are they always bibbing.” Then he called the
maid, and bade her that she should arise and give them drink in their
chamber. So the maid arose and went unto the fire, and would have taken
a light; then beheld she the wolf, and looked straight into his jaws,
and she was affrighted, and let the light which she had taken fall, and
fled away into the court; for she believed nought else but that the wolf
had devoured the children. But with a loud voice did Owlglass and the
merchants yet cry for drink. Then thought the host that the maid had
gone to sleep, and called the man, and he arose and would have taken a
light; then beheld he the wolf, and he believed at once that the wolf
had devoured the maid, and he fled and gat him unto the cellar. Thereat
said Owlglass unto the merchants: “Be ye but patient! soon will ye have
rare sport withal.” And he called the third time to know where the maid
and man might be, for that they perished of thirst; therefore besought
they the host that he should take a light and bring them to drink with
his own hand, for that they could not come forth from their chamber.

The host was thereat very wroth, and believed in his heart that the man
had slept as he went, and he said: “Of a truth these Saxons, with their
continual drinking, cause me to have much labour!” Yet he arose and
lighted a candle in the kitchen, and with that beheld he the wolf as he
stood by the hearth, bearing the shoes between his jaws. Then fled he
unto the merchants in the chamber, and cried aloud with fear: “Come
hither to help me, beloved friends! By the hearth here standeth a
terrible raging beast, the which hath eaten me the children, and maid,
and man.” Then went the merchants and Owlglass with him; and the man
came forth from the cellar, and the maid returned from the court, and
his wife brought the children out of the chamber, and lo! they were all
alive. Thereupon went Owlglass unto the wolf, and with his foot cast it
down, and it lay quite still.

Then spake Owlglass unto the host, and said: “Behold! this wolf is a
dead beast, and dost thou thereat cry out so lustily? What a craven man
are ye? Think ye that a dead wolf will bite ye, and cause your people to
flee into corners? Yet last night were ye so brave, that one wolf, the
which was alive, would not have contented ye to strive withal? and with
two such beasts would ye have fought in the field. But with thee is it
in words, what with most others lieth only in the mind.” And the host
heard these words of Owlglass, and perceived that he had been beguiled,
and crept into his chamber, and was ashamed that he should by a dead
wolf have been so cozened. But the merchants laughed hugely at the
excellent wit and merry conceit of our prince of good fellows, honest
Master Owlglass, and right willingly paid for his provisions with their
own, and rode with him upon their way. Since that time, however, hath
not the landlord extolled his own bravery in like manner.




                   The Eighty and Seventh Adventure.

     _How that Owlglass paid his host with the ring of his money._


One day Owlglass entered at Cologne into an inn, and it came to pass,
that the provision was put unto the fire to cook when that it was very
late, and the time for dinner came soon thereupon. And Owlglass loved
good cheer, and therefore was he wroth thereat, for he loved fasting no
more than a pious friar. This perceived the host, and spake unto him,
saying: “He that cannot bide until that dinner be ready, may eat that he
hath.” Then gat Owlglass a small loaf, and that did he eat; and
thereafter sate down by the hearth at the fire, and he smelled the
savour of the meat upon the spit, and it satisfied him. And when
dinner-time came, the table was set and the meat brought up, and the
host sate with the guests at the table, but Owlglass abode in the
kitchen by the fire. Then said the host unto him: “Wilt thou not sit at
meat with us?” “Nay,” quoth Owlglass, “I care not to eat; with the
savour of the roast am I filled.”

Then the host held his peace, and continued to eat with the guests, and
after dinner they paid him and departed this way and that way; yet abode
Owlglass by the fire. To him entered the host with his pay-table, and
would have of him two Cologne pence for his dinner. And Owlglass said
unto him: “Sir host, are ye that kind of man which demandeth pay of one
who hath not eaten?” Then was the host angry, and said “he should pay,
for an if he had not eaten of the meat, had not he confessed himself
filled with the savour thereof?” Then took Owlglass forth a Cologne
penny and threw it on the table, and said unto the host: “Hearest thou
the sound of that penny?” “Yea,” quoth the host. And Owlglass quickly
took up his penny again, and put it into his pouch, and said: “As much
reward the sound of my penny is unto thee, even so much have I profited
of the savour of thy meat.” And when the landlord would have received
the penny of him, Owlglass denied it unto him, and mocked him with much
scorn, and departed thence over the Rhine water, and gat him back again
into Saxony.




                    The Eighty and Eighth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass at Lübeck did escape from a house when that the watch
                  would have taken him for his debts._


Master Owlglass, like unto most other great and glorious personages,
esteemed money but lightly; and he could not bear to look upon the same
piece of coin oftener than twice—once when that he received it and put
it in his pouch, and again when that he took it forth to spend it in
joyous company. Therefore marvel ye not when that I say unto ye, that
Master Owlglass did oftentimes make debts, the which he could not pay.
And it fortuned, that on a time when that he was abiding in that good
town of Lübeck, that he had not a penny, and the officers of the watch
did go about to catch him, and cast him into gaol until that he paid
every person to whom he owed aught. But he kept within his house, and
went not forth but at eventide, when that darkness had with its black
mantle covered the town. Yet on one evening he perceived that they had
surrounded the house where he lay, and would have entered and have taken
him. And he beheld, that for him was only one thing possible to be
done—that he should in a church find sanctuary. Now, in that same house
lay an old woman who was sick unto death, and sorely afflicted. Unto her
went Owlglass, and took her hand, and did, with a most grave
countenance, say unto her: “Behold, is it not time that thou shouldst
think of thy soul, and make thee ready to depart; for near unto death
dost thou lie.” And therewith sent he unto the priest of the parish,
that he should come, that she might confess unto him, and receive
extreme unction from his holy hands. Then when the host entered in at
the door, did the watch arrive from the guardhouse, and beheld it, and
they prostrated themselves before it; and then Owlglass, while that they
saw him not, departed out of that house, and thereafter gat him unto the
church, where he lay until even, and then departed he out of the town.




                    The Eighty and Ninth Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass at Stassfurt of a dog took the skin, the which he
                gave unto his hostess for her charges._


On a time it came to pass, that Owlglass entered into an inn, and there
found the hostess quite alone. And this hostess had a little dog, of the
which she was greatly enamoured; and ever mote it be, that, when she had
nought to do, this dog must lie in her lap. And Owlglass stood by the
fire, and drank from the beer-can. Now it was the custom with that
hostess, that when she drank beer, she did always, in a small dish, give
thereof unto the dog. So when that Owlglass drank, the dog arose, and
came unto him, and would, by leaps and look, have entreated him for some
beer. That saw the hostess, and she said unto Owlglass: “Behold, beloved
guest, do thou give him to drink in the dish of thy beer for so would he
signify unto thee.” And Owlglass said unto her: “That will I do
cheerfully.” Then departed the hostess to perform whatever business she
had about the house; and Owlglass gave him to drink in the dish, and
therein put likewise a little piece of meat; and when that the dog had
eaten thereof, goeth he to the fire and lieth sleeping thereby. Then
said Owlglass unto the hostess: “Let us now reckon our charges.” And he
asked her: “Good, my hostess, if that a guest eat of thy meat and drink
of thy beer, yet hath not any coin, would ye also unto such an one give
credit?” Then thought the woman not of the dog, but had great suspicion
of his own worthy person (the which, as ye know, my masters, was most
unjust!); therefore she answered quickly unto him: “Master traveller,
here must I have money, or a pledge in place thereof.” And Owlglass said
unto her: “Truly am I right content therewith for mine own part; let the
other look to it for his.”

Then departed the hostess again, and Owlglass took the dog beneath his
cloak, and went into the stable, and there took he his skin off, and
entered again into the house, carrying it privily beneath his coat. Then
called he the hostess again, and took out his money, and said: “Lo! let
us now reckon.” And the hostess reckoned up the charges. Then did
Owlglass lay down half the reckoning upon the table, and said: “There
have ye my part.” And the hostess asked of him: “Who then shall pay the
rest? Have ye not eaten and drank alone in my house?” But he said unto
her: “Nay, but I had another with me, who ate of thy meat and drank of
thy beer. Yet hath he no money, but a pledge can he give thee, the which
is his coat; and therewith will he pay the other half.” And the hostess
said: “What guest mean ye?” Then Owlglass drew forth the dog’s skin, and
spake unto her saying: “Behold, mine hostess, here have ye the best coat
that he hath.” Then was the hostess moved, and saw that it was the skin
of her dog; and she waxed wroth, and said unto Owlglass: “May the evil
thing be upon ye ever! Wherefore didst thou take the skin from off my
dog?” And Owlglass answered her, and said: “Woman, this is thine own
fault, for thou didst demand either money or a pledge. And thou thyself
didst desire that thy dog should drink, and I said unto ye the guest had
no money; and thus, as he had nought else to give ye, take ye now his
skin for the beer the which he drank.” Then waxed the hostess yet more
wroth, and commanded and enjoined him to go out of her house. “Nay,”
quoth Owlglass, “out of thy house will I not go, but ride.” And
therewith did he saddle his horse, and rode forth, and said unto her:
“Hostess, do thou keep the pledge until that thou dost receive the
money; and once again will I visit thee, to see if that thou hast had it
redeemed. Farewell.”




                        The Ninetieth Adventure.

 _How that our noble master gave assurance unto the same hostess, that
                     Owlglass lay upon the wheel._


Hear ye now that which Owlglass did on another day at Stassfurt. It
fortuned, that thither he came again to lie in the same inn; and he took
other clothes, and so disguised himself, and came thither, and entered
in unto the court there, and lo! he perceived in that place a great
wheel. Now did a knavery enter into his sconce therewith, and he lay
down upon it, and gave the hostess a good day. And he inquired of her,
if that she had heard aught said of the famous Master Owlglass? And she
straightway answered him, and said: “Why should I desire to hear tidings
of the knave? Truly, his name hath an ill savour in my nostrils!” And he
said unto her: “Woman, what hath he done unto ye that ye should speak so
bitterly concerning him?” And she answered, and said: “Truly should I
speak bitterly of him. Came he not hither, and stripped me the skin of
my dog from off his back, and gave me the skin for the beer, the which
he drank; for, of a truth, should he have had shame to consort with a
dog as a guest, and thereafter take off his skin in such wise?” And
Owlglass spake unto her, saying: “Hostess, that was not well done.” And
the hostess said: “Aye, and unto a knave’s death will he also come.”
Then said Owlglass to her: “It goes not well with him even now, for he
lieth upon the wheel.” And thereat said she: “As the labour so the hire.
God be praised for all good things.” And Owlglass stood up, and said
unto her: “I am Owlglass; have ye forgotten me? Farewell, I depart
hence.”




                    The Ninety and First Adventure.

_How that Owlglass caused a Hollander from a plate to take an apple, the
                   which evilly ended for the eater._


Honest and true was the payment the which Owlglass gave unto a Hollander
at the village of Andorf, in an inn at that place, where that they
abode, and whither many merchants of Holland did resort. Now Owlglass
was somewhat sick, and did not care to eat meat, and in place thereof
did seethe him soft eggs. Now when that the guests sate at table, came
Owlglass and brought the eggs with him, and the Hollander looked upon
him as a boor, and said: “How is this, boor; dost not like the fare the
which our host giveth unto us, and must eggs be seethed for thee?”
Therewith taketh he the twain eggs, and breaketh them, and the one after
the other doth he swallow; thereafter layeth he the shells before
Owlglass, and saith unto him: “Lo! do thou lick the vessel, forth have I
taken the yolk.” And at this merry jest of the Hollander laughed the
guests, and Owlglass with them.

[Illustration]

But the same evening went Owlglass forth, and bought him a handsome
apple, of the which did he scoop out the inside, and filled the same
with flies and gnats. Then set he the apple to the fire to roast, and
thereafter peeled it, and with sweet honey did cover the outside. And at
night, when that all the guests once again sat at table to supper, came
Owlglass with the apple on the plate, and turned his back upon the table
as if he would have fetched some other thing. And when the Hollander saw
it, he put forth his hand, and plucked the plate unto him, and took the
apple, and swallowed it. Thereupon was he grievously sick, and did vomit
forth the apple and all that in his stomach was beside, so that the host
and all the guests thought that Owlglass had put poison therein. Then
said Owlglass: “Nay, therein is no poison; it is but an apple to cleanse
the stomach; an he had but said unto me that he would have eaten the
apple, would I have warned him; for in the eggs which I seethed were
there not any flies or gnats, but within the apple lay there a goodly
company.” Thereafter was the Hollander well enough again, and he opened
his mouth, and spake unto Owlglass, saying: “Of a truth do thou eat
roast or boiled, whatever thou wilt; even if thou hadst quails like unto
those the which ate the children of Israel in the wilderness, would I
not eat with thee.”




                    The Ninety and Second Adventure.

 _How that Owlglass caused a woman to break in pieces the whole of her
                 wares in the market-place at Bremen._


Now that so happily had Owlglass, unto his great comfort and content,
brought to pass this knavery, departed he again, and journeyed unto the
Bishop at Bremen, who loved Owlglass much; and by reason of his great
wit and continual jests, did hold him in great honour. And he caused the
bishop oftentimes to laugh right merrily, so that he gave unto Owlglass
a house, in the which he had free provisions granted unto him by the
bishop. When that he arrived there, Owlglass did as if he were tired,
and desired to give up his knaveries, and was fain to enter unto the
church there to pray. At that mocked the bishop—as bishops have done
before that time and since—at the resolve of Owlglass—yet would he not
be persuaded, but gat him unto the church, and prayed until that time
that he could not any longer bear the quips and quiddities, the which
were put upon him by the bishop. And privily had Owlglass with a market
woman agreed, and she was the wife of a potter, and in the market-place
sat she with pots and pans to sell: then did Owlglass pay unto the woman
the price of all her ware, and enjoined her what she should do when that
he gave unto her a sign.

Thereafter departed Owlglass, and came unto the bishop, as if he had
come from the church, and the bishop reviled and mocked Master Owlglass,
in that he was so pious and not any longer the same man. At last
Owlglass said unto the bishop: “Gracious prince and reverend father! do
ye now grant me to come unto the market-place, and there sitteth a
potter’s wife, and a wager will I set with you, that without my speaking
unto her, or making a sign unto her with mine eye I will cause, by
magical words, the which I will mutter, that she shall arise up and take
a stick and herself break in pieces all her ware.” Then said the bishop
unto Owlglass: “Such a thing would I fain behold.” Therefore with him
made the bishop a wager of thirty pieces of gold that the woman did it
not. And Owlglass did accept the wager, and with the bishop gat him unto
the market-place. Then did Owlglass shew unto the bishop the woman where
she sate, and they departed, and sate upon the house of the town council
hard by. Then ’gan Owlglass to make incantation and conjuration, at the
which stirred the potter’s wife not a whit, and in good sooth the bishop
rejoiced that he had most truly won his wager. At last gave Owlglass the
sign unto the woman, the which they had agreed, thereupon arose she up
and taking a stick, doth soundly belabour the ware, and breaketh it all
in pieces very small. And with much content laughed the bishop; yet was
vexed in the matter of the thirty pieces of gold, the which he had
manifestly lost unto Master Owlglass. And when that they came again unto
the bishop’s court, did he confer privily with Owlglass, and said unto
him: “If that he would discover unto him after what manner he had so
brought it to pass that the woman should, after that wise, have broken
her wares in pieces, then would he pay unto him the thirty pieces of
gold.” Then answered Owlglass unto the bishop, and said unto him: “Yea,
gracious lord, that will I most cheerfully do.” And therewith said unto
him: “Most simple was this matter in every particular, for I paid unto
the woman the price of her wares before that she brake them, and I made
agreement with her beside.”

Then laughed the bishop right merrily, and paid unto him the thirty
pieces of gold, requiring of him that he should not disclose unto any
one that which had come to pass. And if he kept his counsel, the bishop
promised him that he would help him to a good fat ox thereto. “Yea,”
quoth Master Owlglass, and thereafter departed thence. Now when that the
bishop sate at meat with his knights and gentlefolk, he opened his mouth
and said unto them: “That he had learned an art whereby he might cause
the potter’s wife to break in sunder all her ware.” Then the knights and
gentlefolk craved much to know how this was done, and desired much to
see the same performed; and this sheweth that in all times are men
rather desirous to know how a mystery may be unfolded than patiently to
follow it and wait until it doth itself give unto them the explication
they would have. Then said the bishop: “Lo! an if ye will each of ye
give unto me a good fat ox for my kitchen, will I teach ye all this
art.”

And it came to pass that it was the autumn season when the oxen were at
the best. Then thought each noble knight and gentleman: “This will not
be a great charge unto me, truly then will I do it for in this art to
become learned.” Thus did the bishop have of them sixteen fat oxen, and
such was their price, that thereby was the bishop recompenced some
three-fold for the thirty pieces of gold which he had paid unto
Owlglass. And at this time came Owlglass riding thither upon his horse,
and he said unto the bishop: “Of this booty is the half mine.” And the
bishop answered, and said unto him: “If that thou dost hold thy promise
unto me, will I faithfully perform unto thee our contract; do thou leave
me that which I have won.” Then gave the bishop unto Owlglass a good fat
ox, the which, with great reverence, did Owlglass receive from him.
Thereupon did the bishop, discover unto his knights and gentlefolk in
what manner they could perform the same marvellous thing, according to
that wise by which he had learned it himself; for that Owlglass had paid
unto the woman the price of her wares ere she brake them.

Then sate the noble knights and gentlemen silently upon their stools,
and perceived that with cunning they had been beguiled; nor could they
in any wise murmur thereat. So one scratched his head, and his neighbour
sought for comfort in his neck, and they were sorely troubled for the
loss of their oxen. But it could not be otherwise answered, and
therefore comforted they themselves in that unto their gracious lord the
profit had fallen; yet grieved they for their foolishness. But Owlglass
rejoiced thereat, and departed with his booty. Thus may ye see, my
masters, that when a wise man like unto Owlglass, with a bishop sitteth
under one cap, ye may expect not a little knavery to come thereof!
Therefore take heed and let not knaves approach near unto holy bishops
of the Church, lest they be defiled, and much mischief come unto the
commonwealth thereafter.




                    The Ninety and Third Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass sold a horse, the which would not go over trees._


[Illustration]

On a time had Owlglass a horse, the which he would fain sell, and one
came unto him, and looked upon it, and desired to buy it. And this buyer
spake unto Owlglass saying: “Hath this horse any fault with him, the
which thou oughtest to reveal unto me; and if that he hath shall it be
no break to the bargain, I will yet buy him of thee, and in good money
pay thee the price therefor.” And Owlglass answered and said unto him:
“Verily I say unto you, that I find no scathe in him, but this one, the
which I confess openly, over the trees will he not go.” And the merchant
said: “I crave not that he should go over the trees, and therefore will
I pay thee the price, if thou wilt let me have him for an easy penny.”
Then answered Owlglass and said: “Of a truth for a penny canst thou not
have him; but for five pieces of gold mayest thou receive him from me,”
and they twain agreed the purchase. And when that he would have ridden
the horse forth from the town, came he unto the town bridge, over the
which would the horse not go, for it was a wooden bridge, and built of
trees. And he returned again unto Owlglass, and would have his money
back; but Owlglass said unto him: “That most clearly had he told him the
fault the which was in the horse.” And the merchant gat him unto the
judge, who said: “Most certainly should Owlglass give back unto him the
money.” Then summoned they Owlglass, but he came not; neither at any
time would he make restitution for that he had said the horse would not
go over trees.




                    The Ninety and Fourth Adventure.

_How that of a horse-dealer Owlglass bought a horse, and only paid half
                        of the money therefor._


When that Owlglass came unto the town of Hildesheim he encountered there
a horse-dealer, who, for twenty-five pieces of silver, did offer him a
good horse. And they marketed together for twenty-four pieces; and
Owlglass said unto him: “Lo! the half of it will I pay thee straightway,
and the rest shall I remain indebted unto thee. Thus will I now give
unto thee twelve pieces of silver.” And the horse-dealer (for he knew
him not) said unto him: “Agreed; take thou the horse.” And Owlglass took
him.

And some three months fled by; then came the horse-dealer unto him, and
demanded the twelve pieces of silver. Then said Owlglass unto him:
“Behold, did we not agree that I should remain indebted unto thee for
these twelve pieces of silver?” Thereat the other answered him, and they
strove together, and came unto the house where the judge sate, and
entered in, and would therewith have it appointed how the matter should
stand. And then did Owlglass say he would remain faithful unto his
bargain, according as he had bought the horse; and said unto the judge:
“For twenty and four pieces of silver bought I the horse, and I paid him
twelve thereof in good money; the other twelve agreed we that I should
remain indebted unto him. If now that I do give him the money shall I
falsify my word; and that have I never yet done, but always performed
the thing which was commanded unto or required of me. And so let it be.”
Then was the suit before the judge withdrawn; and so stands the
business, as if it were in the Chancery Court, unto this day.




                    The Ninety and Fifth Adventure.

     _How that in the land of Brunswick Owlglass turned shepherd._


[Illustration]

Owlglass was a man that, with all his endeavours, could never grow rich,
the which is a marvel, considering how it is that so many knaves prosper
right well; and here was one that in honesty could never be approached,
and yet was poor. Now he took counsel within himself, and said: “I have
heard it said, that peradventure if one turneth shepherd, by the cunning
of the patriarch Jacob one may grow rich.” And he also had heard it
said, that in the Duke of Brunswick’s service all men grew rich in no
long season. So he gat him unto the duke; and when that he had come unto
him he spake unto him, saying: “Most gracious duke, do thou, with thy
marvellous goodness, appoint me that I shall be a shepherd in thy
service for some years; for I would fain have money, that in mine old
age I may live; and for my service I desire no other recompence.” And
the duke did grant the post unto him for ten years. Then was Owlglass an
excellent shepherd; and when that he heard that in any part of the
duke’s country there was good grazing land, then wrote he straightway
letters unto that land, and told the people thereof that he would bring
thither his master’s cattle to graze. And in great terror did the farmer
boors assemble, and did, for fear that the cattle should eat up all
their substance, make collection, and send unto him five and twenty
pieces of gold to go elsewhere. Then thought Owlglass: “A most fair
thing is this;” and wrote unto another city, and thence also came money
unto him; and this went forward so long, until the duke himself asked
Owlglass how that his post prospered. “Truly,” quoth he, “I have a fair
inheritance thereby, and a coat of delicate workmanship; for there is no
office so little, that by it one may not have profit.” “Nay,” answered
the duke; “I must unto this see myself.” Hence comes it that dukes,
princes, kings, emperors, and all their lackeys, do continually take
into their own hands the work and labour of lesser men; for the duke
said unto Owlglass, he himself would do this thing; and Owlglass
answered him, saying: “No office is so little, that the hangman may not
from it draw an inheritance. For the great be in marvellous peril
alway.”




                    The Ninety and Sixth Adventure.

       _How that without money Owlglass bought a pair of shoes._


Now it fortuned, that on a time Owlglass was at Erfurt, and there went
through the Shoemaker’s street; and a woman called loudly unto him, that
he should come unto her and buy a good pair of shoes. Then came he
straightway unto her, and took a shoe, and put it on his foot; then took
he up its fellow, and put it upon the other foot, and said unto her:
“Lo! they do suit me marvellous well,” and therewith ran off. Then made
the woman a great outcry, and said: “Stop me yonder thief, ye good
folk!” And they would have held him. “Nay,” said he, “good people, now
do we run for a wager; therefore let me go, and then shall I win a pair
of shoes.” Thus came he off with the pair of shoes; but so ill made were
they, that he gave them unto the servant at the inn where that he lay.




                   The Ninety and Seventh Adventure.

  _How that Owlglass sold unto the furriers at Leipzig a live cat, the
    which was sewed into the skin of a hare; and how rare sport came
                               thereof._


In no long space of time was Owlglass ever ready with a knavish device.
This proved he to be a great truth when that he was at Leipzig, among
the furriers on Easter Even when altogether they held their feast. And
it came to pass that most willingly would they have had some kind of
game to make them a hunt therewith. Of this heard Owlglass, and in his
knavery he bethought him: “The furrier at Berlin gave thee nought for
thy labour, therefore shall these men pay thee thy pains.” With that
departed he into his inn, where he lay, and there found he that the host
had a fine fat cat. This took Owlglass, and under his frock he carried
it off; and then gat he him to the cook and besought him that he should
give unto him the skin of a hare. For therewith would he play off a
knavery of great and merry conceit. The cook gave unto him the skin
which he demanded of him; and then he took needle and thread and sewed
up the cat therewith in the skin. After did our master put on a boor’s
frock, and gat him to the town-house, and stood over against it. But his
hare held he concealed under his coat until that a furrier came by. Then
said Owlglass to the furrier: “Would his honour buy a good hare?” and
then shewed it unto him, where that he held it under his frock. And the
furrier and Owlglass conferred together; and they agreed that he should
give unto him four silver bits for the hare, and six pennies for the old
sack, in the which Owlglass had put the hare. Then the furrier carried
the hare into the house of their alderman, and they rejoiced with great
merriment, and were content in that they had got such a good live hare,
for the furrier was right proud of getting such an one. Then did all the
furriers feel and punch the hare to see how fat he was; and not that
year, did they all agree had they seen such an one—the which was very
true! And at the time they would hold their games, they fetched dogs and
let the hare run in the garden, for they would have a hunt.

[Illustration: HOW OWLGLASS SOLD PUSS.]

Now when that the hare could run no more, it leaped up into a tree, and
cried out _Miaow_, for most willingly would it again have been at home.
And when that the furriers beheld this, they cried aloud: “Brethren,
brethren, come let us pursue the wicked knave, which hath beguiled us,
and strike him dead!” And so would it have been if Owlglass had not put
on other clothes, so that they knew him not. But now, my worshipful
masters, hence came the proverb: “The cat hath leaped up into the tree.”
Yet were the furriers beguiled, and so remained.




                    The Ninety and Eighth Adventure.

             _How that Owlglass hired himself unto a boor._


It came to pass on a time that Owlglass served a boor; and the boor did
desire that they twain should, with a horse and cart, get them unto the
forest to cut wood. And Owlglass sate upon the horse’s back, while his
master sate behind him upon the shafts of the cart. Then ran a hare
across the road whither they journeyed; and the master, when that he
beheld it, said: “Lo! my man, turn we back again upon this day; for it
is a most evil fortune when that a hare doth run across the way. To-day
will we do some other thing.” So they gat themselves home again.

On the next day departed they as before unto the forest; and Owlglass
spake unto his master, and said unto him: “A wolf hath run across the
road, master; what shall we do?” “Ha! sayest thou so?” quoth the boor.
“Drive forth, drive forth; great good fortune is it when that a wolf
doth cross thy road.” So Owlglass drave the horse into the forest; and
when that they gat thither, they took the horse out of the traces, and
left the cart standing, while they gat them to their labour. And when
that they had done, the boor despatched Owlglass, and bade him fetch the
horse and cart, that they might load and get them home once more.

Now when that the excellent Owlglass came before the forest, he beheld
the horse lying dead, and the wolf was inside thereof devouring him with
great appetite. And at this sight was Owlglass secretly glad, and ran
back and said unto the boor: “Come hither, boor come hither! the good
fortune is within the horse!” Thereat said the boor unto him: “What dost
thou mean?” Yet Owlglass hastened him, and said: “Do thou lose no time;
but get thee forward, or thou wilt have lost the good fortune.” When
that they came thither, lo! the wolf lay within the carcase of the
horse, and eagerly tore and devoured him. Then said Owlglass: “Boor! an
if ye had gone into the forest yesterday, when that the hare crossed our
path, would your horse have been whole! But I crave not to abide with
one that on signs and omens setteth his trust. Farewell!” And so
departed.




                    The Ninety and Ninth Adventure.

        _How that Owlglass gat him to the High School of Paris._


Once Owlglass gat him as far as Paris, that learned city, at a season
when the examination for licentiate was going forward. And he went in
and stood over against the one who on the stool sate and looked upon
him. Then the learned doctor said unto him: “What wouldst thou have!
Dost thou desire to say aught unto me?” Then Owlglass took counsel
within himself, and said: “Yea, most learned, I have a most difficult
question I would desire resolved. Thus: Is it better for a man to do
that which he knoweth, or to learn that which he knoweth not? Make the
doctors the books, or the books the doctors?” And at this question
marvelled everyone, and disputed thereupon; and the greater number
thought that it was better that a man should do that which he knoweth,
than that he should first learn that which he knoweth not. Then said
Owlglass: “Then what fools must all of ye here be, in that ye ever crave
to learn that which ye know not, and what ye know, that do none of ye.”
Then departed he with great scorn of pedants and scholars.




                        The Hundredth Adventure.

   _How Owlglass would fain have been an innkeeper at Rouen, but was
     beguiled by a one-eyed man, and again, in turn, cozened him._


In the town of Rouen, it fortuned that there was a certain tax to be
taken from those who desired to keep an inn, which was named the
Sign-tax, for to set up a sign you must give a crown, and of this tax a
one-eyed man was the receiver. Owlglass thought to keep an inn, but
could never have permission from this man to put up a sign unless he
would give him a piece of gold, for that they had had a quarrel at some
time before. But at last he was obliged to give a piece of gold, and he
set his mind to make the receiver sorry for having taken it. So soon,
therefore, as he might set up a sign, Owlglass had a one-eyed man
painted, to whom another man was giving a piece of gold, and underneath
he had written, “_Au Borgne qui prend_.”[11] Those who beheld that sign,
and who knew the story, laughed much thereat; and when it came unto the
ears of the tax-receiver, he was very angry, and went and laid his
complaint before the judge. Owlglass was cited to come to answer the
complaint, the which he did at once, and confessed that he had set up
the sign in shame of the man who had so cheated him; upon which the
judge commanded the other to be sworn, who then said it was true he had
taken so much money, and offered to return it. This he was ordered to
do; and Owlglass was commanded to alter his sign, but all that he did
was to paint out the p in the writing, which thus read: “_Au Borgne qui
rend_;”[12] for in sooth it was not easy to discover in the painting
whether the man was giving or taking the gold-piece. Thus Owlglass
satisfied justice, and the judge would not hear the second complaint.

-----

Footnote 11:

  To the one-eyed man who takes.

Footnote 12:

  To the one-eyed man who returns.




                    The Hundred and First Adventure.

   _How in Berlin Owlglass was an officer, and collected taxes of the
                                boors._


When, unto his shame, Owlglass forgat his noble and virtuous estate, and
became a tax-officer, he was on a time sent forth unto a village, to
demand money of a boor, who either loved not to pay money, or was poor
and could not. And as Owlglass with his little lance went forth, the
following matter came to pass. For as an evil and wicked office bringeth
shame unto the mind, so also leadeth it every man into bad company;
therefore marvel ye not when that I say unto ye that the Devil, that
prince of evil and darkness, encountered Owlglass as he ran. And his
high estate had the devil put off, and appeared in the likeness of a
boor, yet did Master Owlglass perceive right well who it was. Then ’gan
they to confer together, and walked together on the way. The boor said
unto him: “Thou goest about to receive money, let us now make
fellowship; for I go to find a concealed treasure, and of that will I
give thee half, and do thou the same with me.”

Now Owlglass had heard it said of old time, that the devil knoweth full
well of many a hidden treasure, so he agreed with him, and they departed
together. And it came to pass, that as they went through a village, they
heard a child crying and screaming. Then came its mother by, and said
unto it: “Hold thy peace, wilt thou? May the foul fiend take thee!”
Thereat said Owlglass unto the devil: “Lo! hearest thou, there hast thou
a child given unto thee?” The devil said: “My good friend, the mother
meaneth not that she saith; I dare not take it, for it is but spoken in
choler.” Then went they forward unto the field, and came unto a herd of
swine; and lo! a great fat sow had departed from the herd, and the
swineherd pursued it, and cried aloud, as he ran: “May the devil take
thee!” That heard Owlglass, and for as much as he loved bacon, would
fain have received his share, and said unto the devil: “Lo! dost thou
not hear? Now hast thou a fat sow given unto thee. Put forth thine hand
and take it, for it is thine. With thee will I have no further
fellowship.” Then said the devil: “Worthy Master Owlglass, what could I
do with a sow? Nor hath he any grave intent to give it unto me; and if
that I took it, the poor swineherd would have to pay for it. Nay, I will
await something better than this.” For the devil was tenderhearted; but
Owlglass thought upon the treasure.

Thereafter came they unto the court-yard of the boor of whom Owlglass
was to receive the money; and he stood in the barn and thrashed the
corn. When that he looked up and beheld Owlglass, he opened his mouth,
and spake unto him, saying: “Art thou there again? The devil take thee,
for I would fain never see thee again.” Thereat said the devil unto
Owlglass: “Now dost thou see? He meaneth this thing most devoutly; do
thou, therefore, come with me, for of a truth have I found my treasure,
the which was hidden.” But Owlglass answered, and said unto the devil:
“Nay, but now will we reckon with each other; for I said unto thee that
I would no longer have fellowship with thee, and now do I fulfil my
saying; therefore do thou nothing contrary to law.” Therewith cited he
the devil before the judge, and bade him hold his hand not to touch him,
for was he not a government officer? I know not, my good masters,
whether the devil,—who is contrary unto all law, and existeth contrary
thereunto,—had no great love for judges, or whether they were so steeped
in evil-doing that even the foul fiend held them in contempt; yet most
true it is, that he came not unto Owlglass his citation. Thereafter grew
Owlglass greater in virtue, and left off his evil ways, and laid down
his office.




                   The Hundred and Second Adventure.

_How that in his latter days Owlglass became a pious monk, and what came
                               thereof._


Unto all men is there appointed a time when that their manifold and
heavy sins sit upon their remorse-laden souls, and they groan for mercy,
and writhe under the pangs of repentance. And though Owlglass had,
throughout his life, been a virtuous man (as I have clearly manifested
unto ye, my masters!) yet after he had journeyed hither and thither in
all lands, there came unto him a gallows-repentance; and he bethought
him how that he unto a convent might depart, taking the vows of poverty,
and there end his days, and cast forth all that old leaven of his
evil-doings, and be a pious and a good man henceforth, so that his soul
should not be lost. Therefore he gat him unto the Abbot of the convent
at Marienthal, and entreated of him that he would receive him as a
brother, and unto the convent would he in his testament give all that he
had. Now, the which was not a most marvellous thing, the abbot with such
fools was greatly contented, and therefore spake he unto Owlglass, and
said: “For that thou hast yet some gear of valuable treasure, art thou
welcome unto me. But, seest thou, some office must thou have, for among
our fraternity is no one without somewhat to do; every one among us hath
an employment, and therefore must thou too labour.” And Owlglass
answered, and said: “Yea, reverend father, that would I cheerfully do.”
Thereat said the abbot: “Then, with God’s grace, as thou lovest not much
labour, do I receive thee, and be thou our gatekeeper. So wilt thou stay
within thy chamber, and wilt have neither sorrow nor great work, only to
fetch thy provision and beer from the cellar, and to lock and unlock the
gate.” And the pious Owlglass said: “Reverend father abbot! God give you
guerdon therefore, that ye do so kindly consider the infirmities of a
poor old man, borne down with the weight of his sins and broken with
sickness, of a truth will I perform everything that ye do enjoin me.”
Then said the abbot: “Behold, do ye now receive of me the keys, but let
not every one enter herein, or will the convent soon grow poor, for the
robbers will waste our substance, and eat up all our provision;
therefore do thou let but few in, scarcely more than the third or
fourth.” And Owlglass answered, and said: “Yea, reverend sir, I will do
your bidding as ye command me.” Then did he never let more than the
fourth person enter into the convent, it recked not whether they
belonged unto the convent or no.

And a complaint came unto the abbot of this action of Owlglass, and he
called him and spake unto him after this wise: “What a vile and doubly
condemned knave art thou, that thou wilt not let such enter in that unto
the convent do belong.” “Reverend Lord Abbot,” answered Owlglass, “lo!
unto the fourth have I let them enter, according as thou didst signify
unto me. Thy words have I fulfilled with great diligence.” “Like unto a
knave hast thou fulfilled those words of mine,” said the abbot, and
would fain have again been free of him. Then the abbot appointed another
door-keeper, for he marked well that Owlglass would not hold from his
ancient beguilings. And he gave unto him another office, and bade him
count the monks in order as they gat them down unto matins, and he spake
unto him, saying: “And behold, if thou dost overlook one of them then
must thou get thee hence.” Then said Owlglass to the abbot: “Verily is
this a heavy business; yet an if none other hath command to do it, must
I fulfil it as well as may be.”

Thereafter brake he privily by night some boards from the staircase, by
the which the monks came down unto the chapel. Now the Prior of that
convent was an old man and a pious, and ever was he the first the which
entered into the chapel to be at matins. And he came unto the stairs and
sought the steps the which by Owlglass had been broken away, and found
them not, but fell through and brake his leg. Then cried he out with a
loud voice, so that all the other monks ran with great haste unto that
place to see what had come to pass, and fell one after the other over
the prior. Then did Owlglass get him unto the abbot, and said unto him:
“Most reverend sir! I have fulfilled mine office as thou wouldst have
from me.” Therewith gave Owlglass unto the abbot the piece of wood, the
tally on the which he had nicked down the number of the monks as he
stood thereby. And the abbot said unto him: “Like unto a most vile knave
hast thou fulfilled my command; get thee now straightway forth from this
place.” So Owlglass departed, and put from him his monk’s frock, and
came unto Möllen, where he thereafter lay sick and died.




                    The Hundred and Third Adventure.

 _How that when at Möllen Owlglass lay sick, his mother came unto him._


In sickness and in health hath a man but one ever kind friend, who in
him can see no fault, whose good counsel abideth within his heart, and
bitter sore is it when he followeth not the words spake unto him with
such noble and truthful intent; yet such was the action of Owlglass. For
when that in his youth his mother would have restrained him from his
knavery, would he not be persuaded. Now at Möllen lay he grievously
sick, and not one of his noble friends, unto the which he had caused
such great laughter, cared to come nigh unto him; yet came his mother,
who with fear and trembling had, in her solitude and desolate home,
marked the courses of our noble master; and she besought him, saying:
“Soon wilt thou depart unto the land of darkness and shadow, the which
men traverse with shuddering, quaking with fear for the evil they have
done, for of a truth is no man good, no man worthy of grace! Therefore
do thou, I pray of thee, bequeath unto me of thy substance, that in my
old age and decrepitude I may have some comfort; for I perish of sadness
and sorrow, the which killeth more than an empty stomach, and destroyeth
more than the bitterness of winter frost.”

And, as he lay sick before her, did his evil youth rise up against him,
and proclaim him a cunning and deceitful knave. Then took he his
mother’s hand between his twain, and opened his mouth and said unto her:
“Lo! evil gotten riches reward not any man, neither canst thou on them
place thy comfort. Now in this world is it a rule, the which none doth,
that of him which hath anything should you take of his substance, and to
him that hath not allot ye a part. Yet is my good fortune so great that
my treasure is hidden where no man can find it. If that thou canst
discover aught that is mine take it and use it freely. But an if thou
findest it not, be not grieved, for my treasure is subtle and lieth most
privily concealed.” Then understood his mother the words which he spake
unto her, and cared not any more to receive from him aught that by guile
and cunning he had received of others. Yet may we perceive, in another
place, what that treasure was, and how eagerly men strove thereafter.




                   The Hundred and Fourth Adventure.

_How that when Owlglass was sick unto death, he made confession of three
       things, the which it sorely troubled him he had not done._


Sorrow and trouble had Owlglass for his manifold wickedness; but the
mood in which he spake unto his mother, remained not upon him any while.
For as the tree falleth so doth it lie, and in so much joyous company
hath Master Owlglass spent his life, that now at the end of it can he
not send forth the remembrance of it, and a smack of his ancient knavery
cometh back unto him. When those which were around him perceived that he
was near unto his end, they besought and moved him to confess his
transgressions unto the priest. And that would he not do until an old
nun of marvellous wisdom came and entreated him. Then he opened his
mouth and spake unto her, saying: “Nay, but I die not sweetly, for death
is bitter indeed, and unto me cometh with a face of woe; and why should
I confess unto any man in secret? For what I have done,—knowing that in
my manhood I have perfected many and divers things,—is perceived by me
to be noised abroad over many lands and countries, and unto not a few is
it well known, and of me converse they continually; and unto the end of
time shall the inheritance of my life come unto others that arise after
me. Of a truth do I not think so scurvily of the world. But an if I have
done therein any good, it shall not be remembered; and if man receive it
not, then will the Almighty Lord record it within the glorious book he
hath of his creatures. And yet of my evil doings will there be constant
report, so that without confession shall they be multiplied. Three
sorrows have I, the which I have not done and performed, and the which
could have been accomplished by me.”

[Illustration: HOW OWLGLASS REBUKED THE PRIEST’S COVETOUSNESS.]

And the holy nun answered him, and said: “Dear heart! be ye content; for
an if it might be an evil thing that ye would do, have ye in the thought
concerning it wrought more than half thereof. But what be these things,
evil or good?” And Owlglass answered, and said: “The first of these
things is, that when I beheld a man walking in the street, and his coat
hung below his mantle, I followed after him, and I thought that the coat
would have fallen from off him; then would I fain have rolled it up, and
did I not do it. For when that I approached unto him, I was grievously
vexed that I could not cut off his coat as far as it hung down beneath
the mantle. And this thing, the which I did not, troubled me most
sorely. Unto this add I the second thing, the which is, that when I
behold a man who sitteth, and with a knife thrust between his jaws, doth
pick his teeth, then would I gladly jerk the knife into his wizen, for
that thereby he might not again mar his teeth. And the last thing that I
have not done is, that when a pack of old women sate conferring
together, and gossiping away the character, conduct, and interests of
those which be fools enow to look upon them with awe and reverence, I
could not sew their mouths up, hath troubled me sorely.” Then said the
old nun unto him: “Meanest thou that, and wouldst thou do it unto me?”
“Yea,” quoth the dying knave. “Then would I give unto thee thy viaticum,
and assoilzie thee,—and that thou shouldst get thee unto the foul fiend,
the which owneth thee, and all like unto thee!” “Nay,” answered
Owlglass, “an if thou dost this, thou dost condemn the whole human race,
for be we not every one of us fools or knaves?” But she tarried no
longer with him, the which he deemed not civil, for with others, until
that he was bidden to depart, remained he always.




                    The Hundred and Fifth Adventure.

  _Saith, How that to a greedy priest Owlglass confessed his sins, and
                  paid him handsomely for his pains._


And it came to pass, that when the nun had departed from him, he still
thought that with this world he would leave not a moment without profit;
therefore when that they brought a priest unto him, lost he not any time
in rehearsing unto him his sins, and likewise giving unto him such a
lesson as in this true and veracious chronicle will now be set forth.
For the greed of priests be very great, and ever delight they in
clutching from the poor such money as would otherwise fill their
ill-lined bodies with good meat and drink, and cover their pinched limbs
with a fair doublet. So when that this priest came unto Owlglass,
perceived he that an adventurous man had our master been, and in his
time had made not a little provision for his purse, and could,
therefore, pay unto his confessor a goodly sum. And unto him did he
therefore speak, beseeching him to think of the peace of his soul, and
that he should pay money for masses, the which should be said and sung
for him. Thereunto answered Owlglass, that it was well said of him, and
he bade him to come again that afternoon, and he would make provision
therefor.

Then departed the priest, and came not again until even; and our good
master made preparation, and gat a large vessel and filled it with
pitch; and on the top of the pitch laid he some crown-pieces, and
ducats, and other money, so as to hide the pitch from the eyes of the
priest. Then confessed Owlglass his sins, and the priest gave him
absolution, and then would have received the money of him. And Owlglass
said unto him: “Lo! in yonder vessel lieth store of treasure, put in
thine hand and pluck forth a handful; but do thou see that thou dip not
too deep.” Yet was the priest greedy, and hearkened not unto the words
of Owlglass, but dipped his hand deep into the vessel, and behold! when
he brought it forth again was it with pitch all defiled. Thereat was
Master Owlglass greatly benefited, so that strength returned unto him,
and he rose up from his bed and said unto him: “Dost thou not see! I
required of thee that thou shouldst not dip too deep into the vessel;
but thou wouldst not hearken unto my words, for on the top lay the
treasure, the which was thine.” And he laughed and made sport of the
priest’s greed. Then was the priest wroth, and departed, and would with
such a knave have no more to do.




                    The Hundred and Sixth Adventure.

_How that Owlglass in three parts did divide all that belonged unto him;
 and the one part gave he freely unto his friends, and another thereof
humbly to the town council of Möllen, and the third part unto the priest
                                there._


Now when that Owlglass lay sick, every day grew he weaker, and knew that
his death was approaching; therefore he made his will, and in three
parts did he divide his wealth,—the one part gave he unto his friends,
and the other unto the town council of Möllen, to pay the debts which
lay upon the town, and the third part unto the priest of that place. But
he made one stipulation, and caused them to promise that they would bury
him in the holy earth of the churchyard, and after a Christian wise sing
and say a mass and vigil for his sinful soul; and then, after four
weeks, should they open the chest in the which lay his treasure, and the
which chest was with three most excellent locks shut, and unto each gave
Owlglass one key, and they accepted the trust of him, and then bidding
them all farewell and enjoyment of the wealth he left unto them, he
gently gave up the ghost, and so from this world departed one of the
best and noblest men the which Germany had ever seen; nor since that
time hath there been any like unto him in rarity of wit or subtlety of
heart. And though there be no lack of fools and knaves who chouse and
cozen, yet do none of them perform such chousing and cozening to the
glory and advantage of true wisdom, in manner and form as did Owlglass.

And after the four weeks were gone by, and all things had been duly
accomplished according to the promise made unto him, came the council
and the priest and the friends of Owlglass to open the treasure, and
enter upon the enjoyment thereof. And, behold! when they opened the
chest, found they nought but stones. Then grew they angry, and strove
together; and each believed that the other had from the chest taken the
treasure. But it was not so; for of a truth understood they not until
afterward, that all treasure is indeed of no greater account than
stones. For a lusty frame and a cheerful heart be the best of riches.




                   The Hundred and Seventh Adventure.

   _How that at Möllen Owlglass died, and the swine did cast down the
           coffin when that the good priests sang the vigil._


Now after that time that Owlglass had given up the ghost, the people
entered in unto the hospital where he lay, and took him, and put him in
a coffin, and set it upon tressels. Then came the good priests to sing a
vigil round his coffin, and they lifted up their voices and sang. But as
they sang came the swine of the master of that hospital, and entered in
unto the room where lay Owlglass, and they ran underneath the coffin,
and cast it down. Then came the nuns and monks, and much folk likewise,
and would have driven forth the swine, but that could they not do; and
the swine leaped and ran, and upset the nuns and monks, so that it was a
most lamentable sight to look upon. Afterwards gat the swine forth into
the street, and the nuns entered in, and laid Owlglass within his coffin
again; and they bare him forth unto the graveyard to bury him.




                   The Hundred and Eighth Adventure.

       _How that our for ever prized Master Owlglass was buried._


And at the burying of Owlglass was there a most wondrous strange thing.
For when that they all stood in the graveyard round the coffin in the
which he lay, they took ropes to let it down into the grave, and, of
these twain ropes, brake the one which was under his feet, and the
coffin fell down, and stood on end. Thus stood Owlglass in his grave.
And the folks around marvelled greatly thereat, and said: “Nay, let him
stand an if he will; for in his life wrought he many great marvels, and
he will be strange in death likewise.” Then they filled the grave with
earth, and above his head set a stone, and on it did they cunningly hew
the likeness of an owl, who within his claws bare a glass, and upon the
stone set the words which stand written in the chapter which here
followeth.




                    The Hundred and Ninth Adventure.

             _Telleth what stood upon his gravestone._[13]

                              EPITAPHIUM.

                   This stone dare none to overthrow,
                   For Owlglass upright stands below.

[Illustration: ANNO MCCCL.]

-----

Footnote 13:

  This device is faithfully copied from that in the edition of 1519.




                    The Hundred and Tenth Adventure.

 _How in after time our most excellent Owlglass was esteemed so worthy
 that he was made a holy Saint; and on the day of All Fools in April do
 the folk alway keep his memory, as also when they do a foolish thing,
     the which maketh him continually esteemed of great and small._


That which is accomplished of a great man must at some season bring him
honour and glory; therefore be not astonished at the matter which came
to pass when that Cardinal Raymundus lay at Möllen great number of years
after. For in those parts did many bear in mind the virtues of the
illustrious Owlglass; and the cardinal himself went and looked upon the
gravestone of Owlglass, and had report made unto him of his doings and
sayings. And, for as much as the people of Möllen gave great glory unto
his memory, the good cardinal wrote unto the Holy Father at Rome; and
unto the great content and delight of the townsfolk of Möllen, Master
Owlglass was made a Saint, and beareth rule over all manner of
chousings, beguilings, cozenings, cheatings, and knaveries having
fellowship with Saint Nicholas; and when that a man goeth about to do a
foolish thing, remembereth he that holy man, Saint Owlglass, and doth
call upon his name—and of a verity is Saint Owlglass, of all the saints
that be in the calendar, that one which hath the government of the
greatest number of devout folks here on earth. For fools be there many;
and upon the first day of that fair month of April, the weather of which
is as various as were the adventures of the holy saint—upon the first of
April, I say, do all men honour him, and indeed every day; for in that
hour in the which they accomplish any idle vain work, do they increase
his glory. So that Saint Owlglass doth receive the continual esteem of
both great and small.




             The Hundred and Eleventh, and Last, Adventure.

     _Reciteth a few grave reflections of this present chronicler._


That thing which a man maketh his own, and causeth aye to be his beloved
work, be it evil or good, will beset him for ever, nor, save in the
prickings and movings of his trembling conscience, and timorous spirit,
will he acknowledge his own desperate courses, the which seemed fair to
enjoy, but turn unto the apples of Sodom and Gomorrah i’ the mouth; and
like unto the red-hot ploughshare, over the which the hardened criminal
walketh, doth the sin all done in life sear the aspen soul, which
quivereth in terror at evil doing. And verily when that I look me back
over the book, my good master, which now I present unto thee, do I
perceive right well that deep meaning and truthful lesson which can be
gathered by the careful reading of such a life as that one of good
Master Owlglass. It hath been said unto us, that we should not do evil
that good may arise therefrom; yet from such actions and enactments as
those of our master came forth good, for we are taught therein to know
the wisdom of the saying of Solon unto that ancient King Crœsus, that
until the end be perceived ye should esteem no man happy. And what
profit had Master Owlglass of his knaveries? A life of continual change
and hurrying to and fro upon the face of the earth—of carking care, and,
oftentimes, pinching hunger and parching thirst. For whatsoever he
wrought was a thing spoiled thereafter, and his knavery and wickedness
at not any season brought him content. Lo! do we not live in other
times; but yet those very same things which lay so heavy upon Owlglass,
sit yet openly among us, in defiance of the judgment which the voice of
the righteous man pronounceth against them. O that folly, knavery, and
injustice, could be rooted up from the fair soil of this world, and cast
forth unto the burning! This book was brought forth with not a little
travail, for while it should cause the merry laugh upon the cheek of old
and young, peradventure it may enter into the hearts of some, and they
may read that lesson which we do all merit. If that Master Owlglass had
not been a knave and a beguiler, might he not, with his rare wit and
ingenious brain, have waxed strong in good and noble things? Therefore
strive we to understand the intent of his life, and use those talents
with the which God hath endowed us, to the greater glory and honour of
the Giver; for truly hath it been here clearly set forth how the fool’s
cap doth extinguish all light of use, beauty, or excellency.

[Illustration: FINIS]




                              APPENDIX A.

   _Bibliographical Notes for the Literary History of Eulenspiegel._


In the foregoing volume, as has been announced in the preface, the
edition followed in chief has been the oldest Low German quarto, printed
at Strasburg in the year 1519. This is the one with which the Franciscan
Friar, Doctor Thomas Murner, has been identified; and, as all reasonable
surmise and possible evidence indicate him to be the author of the
original Eulenspiegel, we have no reason to believe that any older
edition will ever be discovered, although there is a rumour of a Low
German edition of 1483. The title page is as follows:—“Ein kurtzweilig
lesen von Dil Ulen | -spiegel geboren, vsz. dē land zū Brunszwick. Wie
er | seī lebē volbracht hat. & evt (?) seiner geschichten.” Underneath
Owlglass on horseback with owl and glass. It consists of one hundred and
thirty paged leaves in small quarto, and contains twenty-five sheets,
marked A–Z, and _a_–_b_ iiii; but the number of pages in a sheet varies
from four to six and eight. The number of stories contained in the
edition is ninety-six, and, with the exception of nine stories, each is
provided with a rudely-executed woodcut, in all of which Eulenspiegel is
represented in the ordinary dress of the period, his head uncovered, and
without the fool’s dress which it has been the custom since to bestow
upon him. Panzer was only acquainted with one copy of this edition
mentioned in Wenker’s Catalogue, Strasburg, 1783, p. 215, No. 3175. This
is preserved in the Ducal Library of Gotha, and no other is known to
exist. It is now readily accessible to the student, being reprinted by
Dr. Lappenberg (Dr. Thomas Murner’s Ulenspiegel. Leipzig, T. O. Weigel,
1854).

2. In 1520–30, we meet with another edition, the title of which we here
transcribe: “Ayn Kurtz Wylich | lesen van Tyel Ulenspiegel: geboren |
vyss dem land Brunzwyck. Wat he seltzamer boitzen be | dreuen hait syn
dage, lüstich tzo lesen.” Printed by Servais Kruffter, in quarto, in old
Gothic letters; thirteen sheets, A-N, with 104 unnumbered pages. This
edition is known from two imperfect copies, which, however, restore,
when collated, the whole. The first twelve sheets are in the Imperial
Library of Vienna, and the Royal Library of Berlin has the last eleven.
This edition differs from all others by possessing no preface. There are
seventy-eight stories; and the one which appears second in this edition
(which has been taken from the English Black Letter) first makes its
appearance as an Eulenspiegel, as do Adventures 93 and 95.

3. A Dutch edition is first found about this time (1520–30), printed at
Antwerp by Michiel Van Hoochstraten. The following is the title page:

        (Picture of the     “Vlenspieghel.      (Picture of the
             Owl.)      Van Vlēspieghels leuen.    Mirror.)

  En̄ schimpelicke werckē, en̄ wōderlijcke auontueren die | hi hadde
    want he en liet hem gheen boeuerie verdrieten.”

The sheets run to K ij., and forty leaves in small quarto. The only
known copy is at Copenhagen, in the Royal Library, and wants two leaves.
Forty-six, perhaps forty-eight, stories (counting two for the missing
leaves) are contained in this edition, but they are not numbered.

4. 1528–1530. The two editions now to be described are perhaps more
interesting to English readers than any others, and deserve careful
examination. Of the English “Howleglas” two copies only remain, of
different editions and presumed years. At the time when Dr. Lappenberg,
in 1854, completed his bibliographical list, one of these copies only
had reached the British Museum. They are both imperfect; but,
fortunately, what is wanting in one copy is completed in the other. The
title is as follows:

“Here beginneth a merrye Jest of a man that was called Howleglas, and of
many marueylous thinges and Jestes that he dyd in his lyfe, in Eastlande
and in many other places.”

Occupying nearly the whole of the remainder of the quarto page is a rude
woodcut of a king upon his throne with two people standing before,
alluding evidently to the story of the King of Poland’s Jester and
Eulenspiegel.[14] The colophon of the earliest edition, which has no
date, but to which 1528 is assigned by the British Museum Catalogue (Dr.
Lappenberg dates it at 1540–1556), is as follows: “Imprynted at London
in Tame Street at the Vintre on the thre Craned wharfe by Wyllyam
Copland (⸪).”

The book begins immediately at the back of the title with the following
preface:

“For the great desyryng and praying of my good frandes. And I y^e first
writer of this boke might not denye thē. Thus haue I compled & gathered
much knauyshnes & falsnes of one Howleglas made and done within his
lyfe, whiche Howleglas dyed y^e yeare of our lorde God .M.CCCC. &
.L.[15] Nowe I desyre to be pardoned both before ghostly & worldly,
afore highe & lowe afore noble and unnoble. And right lowly I requyre
all those y^t shall reade or heare this presēte Jeste (my ignoraūce to
excuse). This fable is not but only to renewe y^e mindes of men or
women, of all degrees frō y^e use of sadnesse to passe the tyme, with
laughter or myrthe. And for because y^e simple knowyng persons shuld
beware if folkes can see. Me thinke it is better to passe the tyme with
such a mery Jeste and laughe there at and doo no synne: than for to wepe
and do synne.”

The number of adventures in the English Howleglas is forty-six; but they
are not numbered, one being a copy of verses (given in Appendix D), and
forming an additional chapter, making forty-seven. Of this copy,
Signature D is missing; otherwise, excepting the corner of a leaf, it is
perfect. Signatures are from A–M, worked in sheets of eight pages, equal
to fifty-two pages, of which the last is a blank. It belonged at one
time to Garrick, and, with other portions of his library, was
transferred to the Museum, where it will be found with the Press-mark C.
21. _c_.

Of this book a second copy exists, as above mentioned, also in the
British Museum. It is a later edition (1530), but differing in nothing
from the one already described. It is, however, very imperfect, wanting
Signature B and the page marked K iiii, as well as all subsequent pages,
comprising L and M. This has been completed from the other copy. On the
fly-leaf is the following note, which I copy:

“Such is the rarity of this volume, that only _one_ other copy is known,
viz., that in the British Museum, which is of another edition, and is
also slightly imperfect (_Note by the writer of the fly-leaf comment_:
On a more accurate inspection of the above volume, I have discovered
that it wants an entire sheet, viz. _c_[_d_]), wanting the corner of a
leaf. _This_ copy was purchased at the Roxburgh sale by the late Mr.
Heber, whose note will be seen on the fly-leaf immediately preceding the
title.”

Mr. Heber’s note is: “1812. Roxburgh sale £14 5 0. Mem. to examine the
Museum copy.”

In 1842, it was marked in Lilly’s Catalogue; and the date placed upon it
by the Museum authorities is sixth of October, 1857, with the press-mark
12316 _c_.

The only record of any other copy of this English Howleglas, also
referred to in the preface, is in a paper of Mr. Halliwell’s in the
Papers of the Shakspere Society (vol. iv. p. 18, 26–28), where that
gentleman describes the library of a certain Captain Cox, quoting from
an account of Queen Elizabeth’s entertainments at Kenilworth, made by
Laneham, clerk and keeper of the Council Chamber door.

That same Captain Cox is represented by Ben Jonson in the “Masque of
Owls, at Kenelworth, presented by the Ghost of Captain Cox, mounted on
his Hobbyhorse 1626,” and is made to say:

                    “This Captain Cox, by St. Mary,
                    Was at Bullen with King Ha—ry;
                    And (if some do not vary)
                    Had a goodly library,
                    By which he was discerned
                    To be one of the learned,
                    To entertain the queen here,
                    When last she was seen here.”

It has been stated, that Owlglass also existed as a Miracle Play; but
this statement does not seem to refer to more than the Easter Play, to
which reference has been made in the Preface.

5. 1532. This year we find the first French edition, stated to be
translated from Flemish into French (probably from the Antwerp edition)
printed at Paris, the title being as follows:—

Between four flowerets there is first an owl then the word:
“Ulenspiegel,” and after it a round glass. Next: “De sa vie de ses
oeuures | Et merueilleuses aduentures par luy faictes | et des gran- |
des fortunes quil a eux, lequel par milles fallaces ne se lais | sa
tromper. Nouuellement translate et corrige de Flamant | en Francoys.”
The colophon is thus: “Imprime nouuellement a Paris en l’an
Mil*ccccc*xxxii*.” Sheets run to K iiij _b_ in quarto, without
pagination, and the type all Gothic. The only known copy exists in the
Royal Library at Stuttgart.

6. In the same year, 1532, an edition appeared at Erfurt, printed by
Melcher Sachsen. The following is the title: “Von Vlenspiegel eins bau |
ren sun (son) des lands Braunschweick, wie | er sein leben volbracht
hat, gar mit | seltzamen sachen.” Ten sheets in quarto, leaves in number
84, without pagination; the last being blank. There are 102 stories,
with 86 woodcuts, some little merit belonging to the first few—the later
ones having been considerably worn. Only four copies, nearly all
defective, are known of this edition; one was bought for the private
library of the King of Prussia, at the sale of the collection of the
Viennese antiquary Matth. Kuppitsch, and presented by his Majesty to the
Royal University Library of Berlin. There is another in the Royal
Library of München.

7. Another edition, in every respect similar to the Erfurt edition of
1532, was printed between 1533–7; but from the last pages being lost, it
is impossible to say by whom, where, or in what year. The copy is at the
Royal Library of Berlin. The missing leaves are perfected in manuscript;
and it ends with a strange note, to the effect that it was printed at
Augsburg by Simon Gymell, and “translated from the old Saxon tongue into
good German,” in the year 1498. No such person is known to have existed
at Augsburg at that time, and the words between inverted commas, first
appear in 1539, in the Cologne edition.

8. In 1538, an edition was again issued, in every way similar to that of
1532, by Melchior Sachsen at Erfurt. Copies at Berlin, in the
collections of Herr von Meusebach, and Professor J. A. Nasser.

9. Shortly after the 1532 edition of Erfurt, another quarto edition in
forty pages was issued in French, by Alain Lotrian, at Paris. There are
forty-six stories and twenty-six woodcuts. The copy examined by Dr.
Lappenberg belonged to the Ducal Library at Wolfenbüttel, and contains
an autograph of Duke Julius of Brunswick and Lüneburg, dated, July 17,
1567. The title is as follows, after four flowers, with the owl in the
centre, and the looking-glass, and between them the word Vlenspiegel:
“De sa vie & de ces oeuues[16] | Et merueilleuses aduentures par luy
faictes et des gran- | des fortunes quil a euz, lequel par milles
fallaces ne se lais | sa tromper. Nouuellement translate et corrige de
Flamant | en Francoys.” Colophon: “Cy finist les faictz et merueilleuses
aduētures | de Thiel Vlespiegle lequel a este translate de | langage
Flameng en Francoys, et nouuelle- | ment imprime a Paris par Alain
Lotrian demou- | rant en la rue neufue nostre dame a l’enseigne de l’es
| cu de France.”

10. 1539. Ulenspiegel | De sa vie de ses oeuures, | et merueilleuses
auentures par luy faictes: et des grandes fortunes quil a eu: leq̄l par
nulles fallaces ne se laissa trom- | per: nouuellemēt translate &
corrige de flamēnt en francoys.

Colophon: Imprime nouuellement a Anuers en l’an M.CCCCC*XXXIX.

The only copy known is in the Library at Wolfenbüttel. This edition
almost coincides with that of Alain Lotrian, with some very trifling
variations.

11. 1539. A German edition was this year published with the following
title: “EYn wunderbairlich | vnd seltzame History, vonn Dyll Ulnspi |
gel, bürtig auss dem land Brunschweig, wie er sein leben | verbracht
hat, newlich aufs Sachsischer sprach vff | Teutsch verdolmetscht, seer
kurtz- | weilig zu lesenn, myt schö | nen figuren.”

Colophon: “Gedruckt zu Cöln für Sanct Lupus, bey Ian von Ach. Im Iar
Dusent Funffhundert Neunund dreissig.”

One copy of it is to be found in the private Library of the king of
Würtemburg at Stuttgart. The text is divided into one hundred stories,
each with its own heading. The signatures of the sheets run from A to S,
each containing four leaves. The name of the printer was found by Dr.
Lappenberg as Ian van Aich. One other copy is known to be in the Royal
Library at München.

12. 1539. “Wunderbarliche, vnnd seltzame Historyen Tyll Vlnspiegels,
ausz dem land zu Braunschweig bürtig, new auss Sachsischer sprach auff
gut hochdeutsch verdolmetscht. Straszburg, Jac. Frölich. Mit
Holzschnitten. 1539.” This is in quarto, and is mentioned in a catalogue
of a collection of books which were to be publicly sold on 25th January,
1847, at Frankfort-on-the-Main. Lappenberg, who gives us this
information, appears unable to give any more.

13. 1540. “Eyn wunderbarliche | vnd seltzame History, von Dyll Vln |
spiegel, burtig ausz dem land Brunschweig, wie | er sein Leben verbracht
hatt, newlich ausz | Sächsischer sprach auff gut Teutsch |
verdolmetschet, seer kurtzweilig zu lesen, mit schönen | figuren.”
Colophon: “Gedruckt zu Augspurg, durch Alexander Weissenhorn | Im Iar
Tausend Fünffhundert | und fiertzig.”

This edition, in quarto, runs as far as S iii, seventy-three pages,
without pagination. The book contains one hundred adventures (numbered)
and is a reprint, word for word, of the Cologne edition of 1539 (see No.
11, _ante_, p. 224). There are forty woodcuts in all. A copy exists in
the Ducal Library at Wolfenbüttel.

14. 1541. Under this year an Augsburg edition, now at Lemberg, is
mentioned in San-Marte’s Gross-Polens National Sagen (pp. 203 and 207).

15. 1543. “Wunderbarliche, Vnnd | seltzame historyen, Tyll Vienspiegels
| ausz dem land zu Brunschweig bürtig, newlich ausz Säch- | sischer
sprach auff gut Hochdeutsch verdolmetscht.” Colophon: “Getrukt zu
Straszburg, bey Jacob Frölich, | in M.D.XLIII Iar.”

Woodcuts and pagination similar in almost every respect to the edition
of 1519. A copy is in the Royal Library at Göttingen from the Gebauer
collection.

16. 1545. “Seltzame vnnd | Wunderbarliche History- | en Dyll
Vlenspiegels, eines Baw | ren son. Bürtig ausz dem landt zu Braun- |
schweig. Newlich ausz Sächsischer | sprach auff gut Hochdeutsch |
verdolmetscht, sehr kurtzwei- | lig, mit schönen Fi- | guren.” On the
title page is a woodcut of Eulenspiegel on horseback; in the left-hand,
his owl; in his right, the mirror; upon his head, a hat with three
feathers. Beneath: “M.D.XLV.” Colophon: “Gedruckt zu | Franckfurt am |
Mayn, durch Her- | man Gülfferichen, in | der Schnurgas- | senn zum |
Krug.”

Signatures to D iiii., one hundred and nine numbered pages, and one
without pagination, in small octavo. There are one hundred and two
stories, and some of the woodcuts are new.

17. 1551. “Seltzame unnd | wunderbarliche Historien | Tyll Vlenspiegels,
eines Bawren Son | Bürtig auss dem land zu Braunschweiyg | Newlich ausz
Sachszischer Sprach auff gut Hochdeutsch verteutscht, sehr | kurtzweilig
zu lesen mit schö | nen Figuren.” Colophon: “Zu Strassburg | In Jahr |
M.D.L.I.” This is preserved in the Grand Ducal library of Darmstadt; it
is in octavo, sheets A–O without pagination; the stories are 102 in
number, each with a woodcut.

18. 1554. “Eyn wunderbarlich.... History von Dyll Ulenspegel, Cöln. 4to.
1554.” Preserved at the Royal State Library at München.

19. 1558. “Triumphus | humanae | stultitiae, vel Tylus Saxo nunc primum
Latinitate dona | tus ab Joanne Nemio. Vltraiecti. | Harmannus Borculous
excudebat. | Anno 1558.”

Five sheets and a half in 8vo. This translation was made by the rector
of the school at Herzogenbusch, and is in iambics. The copy examined by
Dr. Lappenberg is preserved in the Town Library at Lübeck, and another
exists at Göttingen.

20. 1559. “Les avantures joyeuses et faitz merveilleux de Tiel
Vlespiegle, ensemble les grandes fortunes à luy avenues en diverses
régions, lequel par falace ne se laissait aucunement tromper: Le tout
traduit d’allemand en françoys. Livre fort récréatif pour réveiller les
bons espritz. Lyon, par Jean Savgrain, 1559.”

One hundred and nine pages, in 16mo. Brunet mentions several copies of
this edition.

21. 1557–1563. “Wunderbarlich | vnnd seltzame Historien | Tyl
Eulenspiegels, eines Bawren | Son, bürtig ausz dem Land zu Braunschweig.
Newlich ausz Sächsischer sprach, auff gut | hoch deutsch verdeutscht,
sehr | kurtzweilig, mit schö | nen figuren. Gedruckt zu Franckfurdt | am
Mayn | durch Wey- | gand Han.”

Signatures to Q, 127 pages, and one page without number, in small
octavo. This is the earliest edition where Vlenspiegle becomes
Eulenspiegel. Copies preserved at the Royal Library at Berlin, and the
University library at Jena.

22. 1563. Another edition of the version of Nemius appeared in this
year, and is preserved at Halle.

23. 1567. “Noctvae Specvlum. | Omnes res me- | morabiles, varias qve |
et admirabiles, Tyli Saxonici | machinationes complectens, planè novo
more nunc primum ex idiomate Germanico latinitate donatum adiectis
insuper elegantissimis iconibus veras omnium historiarū species ad venum
adumbrantibus, ante hac nunquam visis aut editis. Avthore Ægidio
Periandro, Bruxellensi, Brabantino. Cum Gratia et privilegio ad
decennium, Francofvrti ad Mœnum, M.D.LXVII.” At the end: “Impressum
Francofurti ad Mœnum, apud Georgium Corvinum, sumptibus Sigismundi
Feyrabendt & Simonis Huteri.”

Signatures A-Z, 210 pages, with 103 woodcuts. Copies at Dresden,
Göttingen, München, Hamburg, and two copies in the British Museum
(Press-marks 243. a. 11 of the King’s Library, and 1080. d. 33). The
book is in elegiac verse, and was composed by Giles Omma, who was known
as Aegidius Periander.

24. About 1571, a Danish translation of Eulenspiegel is mentioned. See
Nyerup Morskabs laesning, p. 269.

25. 1566–1571. We next have to record the title of a very remarkable
versified edition, by John Fischart, as follows: “Eulenspiegel Rei |
mensweisz. | Ein newe Be- | schreibung vnnd Le- | gendt desz
kurtzweiligen Le- | bens | vnd seltzamen Thaten | Thyll Eulenspiegels
mit | schönen neuwen Figuren be- | zieret vn nu zum ersten male in
artige Rei-| men durch J[ohann] F[ischart] G[ennant] M[entzer] gebracht,
| nützlich vnd lustig zu | lesen. Cum Gratia & Privilegio. Getruckt zu
Franckfurt.” Colophon:—“Getruckt zu Frankfurt am Mayn, | durch Johannen
Schmidt, in Verlegung | Hieronymi Feyrabends, vnd | Bernard Jobin.”

This edition is in octavo, with 16 unpaged leaves and 307 numbered
pages, and 98 woodcuts. The year 1571 is assigned to it by Ebert. In
this versified edition, Fischart applied much of the satire of the book
to the events and customs of his time, and he appears to have been well
acquainted with the editions which had preceded him, and his knowledge
of Rabelais, of whom he was the German translator, was also very great,
but he did not know Eulenspiegel to be the work of Murner. Many copies
of this edition exist; amongst others, the British Museum contains one,
the press-mark of which is 11517. a.

26. 1571. “Evlenspiegels Wunderbarliche, abendtheurische vnd gar
seltzame Historien, Geschichte, bossen vnd Fatzwerck, jetzt auffs neuwe
mit schönen artlichen Figuren zugericht, so vormals im Deutschen nie
gesehen. Getruckt zu Frankfurt am Mayn. M.D.LXXI.” At the end: “Getruckt
zu Frankfurt am Mayn durch | Johannem Schmidt, in Verlegung Hieronymi
Feyerabends Anno M.D.LXXI.”

Twenty-one and a half sheets in octavo, without pagination.

27. 1567–1574. “De sa vie [et] des ses oeuures, | Et merueilleuses
aduentures par luy faictes. Et de grandes fortu- | nes quil a eues,
lequel par milles fallaces ne se laissa tromper. Nou | uellement corrige
& translate de Flament en Francoys. viii. c. A Paris pour la vesue Jean
Borfons, demourant en la rue | neuue Nostre Dame, a lenseigne sainct
Nicolas.”

Thirty-two unnumbered pages, in quarto. This edition is almost identical
with that of Alain Lotrian. A copy exists in the Ducal library at
Wolfenbüttel.

28. 1571. “Les aventures joyeuses et faits merveilleux de Tiel
Vlespiegle, trad. du Flamand. Orleans.” An edition in duodecimo.

29. 1571. “Eulenspiegels Historien, mit newen Figuren zugericht.
Frankfurt.”

A duodecimo edition mentioned by Celsii, Elenchus librorum ab āo
1500–1602 editorum, II. 221.

30. 1571. “L’histoire joyeuse et recreative de Tiel Vlespiegle;
nouvellement reueu et traduit du flameng en françois. Orleans, par Eloy
Gibier.”

No date is assigned to this book; but it has been seen by Brunet bound
up with “Le Voyage de Panurge,” issued in 1571. One hundred and seventy
pages, in 16mo.

31. 1575. “Ulen Spiegel. | Van Ulespieghels leuen Ende schimpe- | lijcke
wercken ende wonderlijcke auonturen.... Thantwerpen. Ghedruckt by my Jan
van Ghelen in den witten Hasewint, 1575. Met Gratie ende Privilegie. Mit
Figg.”

A quarto in the library of Dr. Jacob Grimm; this appears to be the
edition prohibited by Philip II. and the Duke of Alba, in 1579.

32 and 33. 1578–9. “Histoire joyeuse et recreative de Tiel Vlespiegle,
ou est traité de ses faits et merveilleuses avantures et de grandes
fortunes, quil a avés. Traduit de Flamand en françois. Anvers. 1579.”

An octavo spoken of by Von Murr, Journal xiv. 353.

34. 1580. “Ulen Spiegel—Van Ulenspieghels leuen En | schijmpelijcke
wercken ende wonderlijcke auonturen | die hi hadde, want hie en liet hem
gheē Boeuerije verdrieten | seer playsant en ghenuechlijck om lesen. |
Ghedruckt Thantwerpen, | Opede Camerpoortbrugghe in den Schilt van
Basele by my | Jan van Ghelen de Jonghe, ghesworen Drucker der Con. Ma.
Met Gratie en Privilegie.”

Title-page in black and red, and the name of the book in old Teutonic
letters. Thirty-two pages, in quarto. Signatures A-H ij. Copy at
Göttingen.

35. 1586. “Wunderbarliche & seltsame Historien Tyl
Eulenspiegels—[without place]—1586.”

An octavo in the Royal Library at München.

36. An edition, bearing the date of the year 1588, is mentioned in the
Catalogue of the Kiel Library, but is not to be found there now.

37. 1592. An edition of this year, uniform with a Flemish edition of Dr.
John Faust, is mentioned by Tross, in Naumann’s Serapeum, vol. xi. p.
159.

38, 39. 1612–1613. “Historie van Thyl | UUlenspieghel | van syn schalke
boeverijen die | hy bedreuen heest | seer ghenoechlije [om te lesen] met
schoone figuren. Tot Rotterdam | By Jacob van der Hoeven Op de | Delffe
vart. 1613.”

Small octavo sheets A-F, forty-eight pages. Preserved in the Royal
Library at Berlin. Another Dutch edition, the title of which need not be
recapitulated, was also published about this time.

40. 1618. “Wunderbarliche und seltzame Historia | Tyllen Eulen- |
spiegels, eines Bawren Son, | aus dem Land zu Braunschweig bür- | tig.
Newlich aus Sächsischer Sprache auff | gut Hochteutsch verdolmetschet
sehr | kurtzweilig zu lesen. Jetzundt wider frisch gesotten vnd new
gebacken. Gedruckt im Jahr M.D.C.XVIII.”

Thirteen sheets in small octavo, without pagination. The stories, 102 in
number, with woodcuts. Preserved in a book, together with a song-book
printed by Jacob Singe, and with which the Eulenspiegel is uniform, at
the Town Library at Bremen.

41. 1636. This edition is not in the list of Dr. Lappenberg. The copy I
have examined is in the British Museum (press mark 12315 _c_), and the
title is as follows: “L’histoire de | Tiel Vlespiegle | contenant ses
faits | merueilleux, & les grandes fortunes | quil a euës durant sa vie.
| Nouuellement traduit de Flammand en François.” (Beneath this a woodcut
representing in a rude way Eulenspiegel with the glass in the right hand
and the owl in the left, on horseback), a Paris, chez Iean Promé, en sa
boutique au coin de la ruë Dauphine. 1636. 16mo. The stories are
forty-six in number and the epitaph is thus given:—

                      “Vlespiegle est icy gisant,
                    Son corp est icy mis en terre,
                    Pour-ce on aduise le passant,
                    Q’aucen ne change cette pierre.”

The pagination is only on one side, and extends to thirty-five,
signatures A-E iij, and the rude woodcut at the commencement is repeated
at the end. The chapters are not numbered, and the following prologue is
printed at the back of the title: “Ayant esgard aux prieres d’aucuns
miens familiers, ausquels ie n’ay osé bounement refuser, amy Lecteur,
i’ay acteur du present Liure, amasse & compilé les plaisantes tromperies
mocqueries & finesses, dont usa en sa vie Tiel Vlespiegle, lequel depuis
mourut l’an mil trois cent cinquante. En quoy toutes fois ie demande
d’estre excusé à l’endroit de toutes personnes, tant Spirituels, que
Temporels, Nobles que Roturiers; attendu le dessein que i’ay tousiours
eu de n’offencer aucun, l’ayant composé, non point au mespris de la
gloire de Dieu, ou pour inuenter menteries & enseigner malice; mais
seulement pour recreer & resueiller les esprit eunuyez, afin aussi que
les simples se puissent garder de telles tromperies au temps aduenir.”
The copy in the Museum is well bound in a dark coloured calf.

42. 1637. “Wonderbaerliche ende seltsame historie van Thijl Ulenspiegel,
van zijne schalke, listighe bootsen ende boeverijen, gedruckt by broer
Jansz.” Broer Jansz is known as the printer of the earliest Amsterdam
newspaper, in 1628.

43. 1640 (?). “Het aerdig leven | van | Thijl Ulenspiegel | Waer in
verhallt worden niet alleenelyk veel aerdige en kluchtige Poetsen en
Boeveryen, maer ook besonderlyk syn wondere aventueren, die hem
geduerende syn Leuen gebeurt zyn, zoo hier, als in andere Landen.
T’Antwerpen. By J. H. Heyliger, op de groote Merkt in de Pauw.”

Sheets A-D 2. Sixty-one sides without pagination, in octavo, with rough
woodcuts. This edition varies considerably from all others, although
founded upon the edition of Broer Jansz. New adventures and scenes are
introduced, and the tone of the book much altered.

44. 1655. “La vie de Tiel Vlespiegle de ses faicts merveilleux et
finesses par luy faictes, & des grandes fortunes qu’il a euës, lequel
par nulles fallaces ne se laissa tromper. Nouuellement corrigée &
translatée de Flamand en François. A Troyes. Chez Nicholas Oudot,
demeurant en la ruë Nostre Dame au Chappon d’Or Couronné.” Signatures
A-E, in small 8vo. In the public Library of Ponikau at Halle.

45. 1657–63. In a volume, entitled “Recueil des plus illustres
proverbes, mis en lumière par Jacq. Lagniet”—the Life of Eulenspiegel is
given as the fourth book. Brunet, Manuel, Tom. III. s. v. Lagniet.

46. 1663. A French translation in “Les œuvres de Bruscambille. Rouen.”
Copy preserved in the Royal Library of Göttingen.

47. 1675. Tyll Eulenspiegel is referred to by Koch, as published this
year without place.

48. 1677. “La vie de Til Eulenspiegel, a Troyes.” An octavo, preserved
at Göttingen.

49. 1683. This edition was not known to Dr. Lappenberg when his work
appeared. The title page is as follows: “La vie | de | Tiel Ulespiegle |
De ses farces & merveilleuses finesses, par luy | faites, & des grandes
fortunes qu’il | a euës, lequel par milles fallaces | ne se laissa
tromper. | Nouvellement corrigée & translatée de Flamen en François,
avec des belles figures. | (Here a figure of an owl in a looking-glass).
A Paris | Chez Pierre Clinchet, à l’enseigne du Dauphin | M.DC.LXXXIII.”
In the British Museum (Press mark, 12315 _a_), small octavo, bound in
paper. The woodcuts in this edition are of the rudest kind and the
prologue the same as that in the edition of 1636. The stories are
forty-six in number, and the epitaph; the number of pages are
eighty-eight. Signatures A-F iij. It seems to be a close reprint of the
edition above mentioned, No. 44.

50. 1690. “Historia Tillen Eulenspiegels.” An octavo, named in Heise’s
Bücher-Catalog. Hamburg, 1827. Vol. I.

51. 1696. “Underlig oc selsom Historie om Tiile Ugelspegel, een Bondes
Soen, barnfoed udi Lande Brunszwig, saare Kortvillig at laese, af
Tydsken paa danske udsat. Sidste Gang prentet i dette Aar.” At the end
is the date of the year, 1696. Thirteen sheets in octavo.

52. 1699. “La vie | de Tiel Ulespiegle | De ses faits merveilleux, des
grandes fortunes qu’il a | eues, lequel par aucunes fallace [sic] ne se
laissa surprendre ni tromper. A Troyes | Chez Jacques Oudot, demeurant
en la rue | du Temple, 1699. Avec permission.” A small octavo,
signatures A-C (query F), forty-eight pages, without numbers. The copy
described by Lappenberg is preserved in the Imperial Library of Paris.


                _17th Century, without particular date._

53, 54. Without date, but belonging to the seventeenth century are two
octavo editions mentioned in a catalogue published at Halle in 1846, p.
379.

55. An undated Dutch edition of this period in octavo has the following
title: “Wonderlijke Levensgeschiedniss van Thyl Uilenspiegel, behelzende
zijn schalkachtig en avonteurlijk leven, op nieuw verbeterd en
vermeerderd, met zeldzaamheden welke noch nimmer bekent zijn geweest.
Tweede Druck. Rotterdam.” This is a second edition.

56. An edition without date appeared at Amsterdam about this time in
octavo. “Wonderbarelyke en zeldzame Historien van Thyl Uilenspiegel, van
zyn schalke, listige potsen en Boeveryen, di hy, zoo in zyn dood, als
ook in zyn leven bedreven heest. Zeer tydkordig en geneuglyk om te lezen
voor oude en jonge lieden.”

57. A Rotterdam edition, with following title page, is in the Bodleian
(Douce, v. 58): “Wonderbaarlyke en Zeldzaame | Historie | van | Thyl |
Ulenspiegel, | en van Zyn Schalke, Listig Bootzen en | Boerveryen, | die
hy en zyn leven | bedreef. | Zeer tydkörtig en genoeglyk om te leezen |
Verciert met Figuuren en zyn Lyk-Ceel. | Te Rotterdam. | By Johannes
Scheffers, Boek- | Drukker in de Prinsestraat.” Duodecimo, eighty-eight
numbered pages, and eight without pagination. Rough woodcuts, and
typography in black letter, except the headings of chapters, and the
last eight pages. This edition is not mentioned by Dr. Lappenberg.

58. Without date: “La vie de Tiel Vlespiegle de ses faicts et merveilles
& des grandes fortunes qu’il a eues, lequel par milles fallacies ne se
laissa surprendre n’y tromper. A Troyes et se vend a Paris chez Antoine
de Rafflé, Imprimeur Marchand libraire, Rue de petit Pont, à l’Image S.
Antoine.” Signatures A-D, small octavo. Preserved in the Royal Library
of Dresden, and in the public Library of Ponikau at Halle.

59. A Rouen edition, without date, not mentioned by Lappenberg: “Tiel
Vlespiegle de sa vie ..... ne se laissa tromper. A Rouen chez Loys
Costé, rue Escuyere aux trois croix Couronnées.” Printed in double
columns in quarto, without pagination, and bound in a volume, preserved
in the British Museum (press mark, 12513/5, _g_), together with a number
of publications by Loys Costé and others, comprising Melusine, Geoffrey
a la grand Dent, Richard sans paour, Florimont, and Oliuier de Castille.

60, 61, 62. At this time several Polish translations seem to have
appeared. See San Marte Gross-Polens Nationalsagen. Bromberg, 1842. p.
203.

                  *       *       *       *       *

63. 1701. “Tiel Wliespiegle, de sa vie, de ses faits et merveilleuses
finesses par lui faites, et des grandes fortunes qu’il a eues, lequel
par les fallaces, ne se laissa tromper, traduit du flamand. Rouen.
Besogne, 1701.” An octavo, on which see Brunet.

64. 1702. “Histoire de la vie de Tiel Wlepiegle, Contenant ses faits et
finesses .... ne s’étant jamais laissé tromper par aucune personne.
Amsterdam, chez Nicolas Chevalier.” A duodecimo, in the Royal Library at
München, and in the possession of Herr Regierungsrath Blumenbach, of
Hanover; as also in the British Museum, press mark, 12315 _a_.

65. 1702. “Histoire de la vie de Tiel Wlespiegle. Contenant ses faits et
finesses, ses aventures, et les grandes fortunes qu’il a euës, ne
s’etant jamais laissé tromper par aucune personne. Nouvelle Traduction
de l’Alemand en François: où l’on a ajouté à cette edition, plusieurs
pieces qui n’ont point encore paru en François jusques à present. A
Middelbourg chez Ric. Parmenter. MDCCII.” A duodecimo, at the Royal
Library at Dresden.

66. 1703. The same title at Amsterdam, printed by Pierre Marteau,
MDCCIII. 247 pages, and eight leaves, in duodecimo. In this edition,
several adventures are added, which appear in the German Rogue (_vide
infra_, No. 71). Copies in the British Museum (press mark 1079 _b_, 18);
at the Royal Library at Dresden, and the Town Library at Hamburg.

67. “La | Vie de Tiel | Ulespiegle | (see edition of 1699, _supra_).
Troyes, chez la veuve Jacques Oudot. 1705. Avec permission.” In small
octavo, with two rude cuts. Signatures extend from A-D ij, over
fifty-four pages. Flemish names, as in some other editions, take the
place of German. This edition is in the library of Dr. Lappenberg.

68. 1713. “Wunderliche und seltsame Historien Tillen Eulenspiegels,
eines Bauren Sohn, aus dem Lande zu Braunschweig bürtig; neulich aus
Sächsischer Sprache auf gut Hochteutsch verdollmetscht, &c., &c. Anitzo
wieder aufs neue aufgelegt. Gedruckt in diesem Jahre (13) Mit
Holzschnitten.” Small octavo. Referred to in the Catalogue of the
“Bibliothek der Maatschappij van Nederlandsche Letterkunde, te Leiden,”
vol. ii. p. 336.

69. 1714. “La Vie de Tiel Ulespiegle de ses faits ... tromper. A Troyes,
1714.” Duodecimo.

70. 1714. “Wunderliche & Seltzame Historien von Tyll Eulenspiegel....
Kurtzweilig zu lesen. Hamburg gedruckt auffm Schaarsteinweg.” Octavo,
sixty-three woodcuts, numbered to 100 chapters, except that, by the
omission of chap. 79, there are really only ninety-nine. This is the
commonly received text constantly reprinted.

71. 1720. “The | German Rogue, | or the | Life and Merry | Adventures, |
Cheats, Stratagems | & | Contrivances | of Tiel Eulespiegel. Let none
Eulespiegle’s Artifices blame, | For Rogues of ev’ry Country are the
same. | Made English From the High Dutch. London: Printed in the Year
MDCCXX.” This edition is the only other version ever made of the work
presented in this volume. It differs widely, however, from the popular
German Owlglass; many stories are introduced which the original editions
did not contain, and the taste for tales of the Decameron class has been
consulted in the compilation of it. Dr. Lappenberg, in his
bibliographical section, assigns to it the date of 1709; but the only
two copies I have seen, one of which is in my possession, give the date
1720 as above. It is an octavo and of extreme rarity, the British Museum
contains no copy of it; the only other copy is in the Douce Collection
at the Bodleian Library, Oxford. That which I have was formerly the
property of Mr. Bernard Quaritch, who priced it at £2 12_s._ 6_d._ A
note on the fly-leaf states the rarity of the book, and that the
annotator never met with another; and Mr. Thoms says, that he only saw
the one in Douce’s Collection. The number of pages is 111, and of
chapters forty-four. Signatures B-P 4, with title and preface. The
rarity of the book is not much to be regretted; for its contents are not
in any way of a nature fitted for quotation or great remark.

72. 1736. “Lustige Historien oder Merckwürdiges Leben, Thaten und Reisen
des Weltbekandten Tyll Eulenspiegels. Mit vielen Historischen,
Politischen, und Moralischen Anmerckungen, Auch allerhand Tugend-,
Staats und Sitten-Lehren, Nach aller Ständen durch und durch, bei jeder
Historie, erläutert und beschrieben (Dresden bei Hilscher).” An octavo,
preserved at the Royal Libraries of Dresden and Göttingen.

73. 1774. “Wonderbaerlyke en zeldzame Historie van Thyl Ulenspiegel, van
zyn Schalke..... Zeer teydkortig en geneuglijk on te lezen. Vor Oude en
Jonge Lieden. Te Amsterdam, by Joannes Kannewet.” A small octavo, of
eighty-eight numbered pages, and four pages without numbers, preserved
at München.

74. A popular romance on Owlglass appeared in two volumes in 1779 and
1784.

75. A Danish translation was published in 1787 at Copenhagen; twelve
sheets in octavo without pagination.

76. 1794. “Leben und Sonderbare Thaten Till Eulenspiegels.” An octavo of
136 pages.

77. 1795. The same, republished at Prague and Vienna.


                _18th Century, without particular date._

78. In the Bodleian at Oxford (Douce Collection, p. 280, press-mark TT
iii) is a French Eulenspiegel, entitled, “Histoire | Plaisante | de |
Tiel Ulespiegel | Contenant les faits & subtilités dont | il s’est
servi. | Revue et Corrigée de Nouveau. | A Limoges, | Chez F.
Chapoulard, Imprimeur-Libraire, | place de Banc.” It is an octavo of
twenty-nine pages, and the number of adventures far from complete. It is
printed on very bad paper, and evidently with a view to cheapness.

79. “Wonderbaarlyke | en zeldame | Historie | van | Thyl Ulenspiegel,
&c. Te Leyden. By P. van Leeuwen. In the de Pieters Choorsteg.” Chiefly
curious from a cut on the title, representing Eulenspiegel holding a
mirror up for an owl to look in, with the inscription above it, “Broeder
myn.” Ninety pages duodecimo, with the ordinary adventures and rude
cuts. Preserved in the Bodleian.

80, 81. Several stories of Eulenspiegel were translated into Jew-German,
and printed at Frankfort-on-the-Main, in octavo, according to Wolf,
“Bibliotheca Hebraica,” vol. iii., p. 86, 1727. Another Hebrew-German
edition appears referred to in the same work, vol. ii., p. 1255, 1721.

82. Flögel mentions, in 1789, an old Polish version (p. 473): “Sowizrzal
Krotochwilny Smiezny Poczatek, zywot y dokonanie iego.” Without year or
place, in octavo.

83. “La Vie | joyeuse et récréative de Thiel Ulespiègle ... qu’il a
eues. A Douai. Chez Deregnaucourt. Imprimeur-Libraire, rue Jacques, no.
45.” Three sheets of forty-eight pages in duodecimo, in the Imperial
Library at Paris.

84, 85. Of the eighteenth century. “Historien von dem wunderlichen &
seltsamen Till Eulenspiegel. Hamburg.” Twelve sheets in octavo. Another
edition published by Solbrig of Leipzig.

86, 87. 1804 and 1806. Two Dutch editions, published at Amsterdam and
Deventer.

88. 1807. A German Leipzig edition.

89. 1819. Dutch book of the Eulenspiegel character, but not containing
the same Adventures. “Het | Leven | van den | Jongen | Ulenspiegel, &c.
Te Amsterdam. By B. Koene, Boekdrukker in de Boomstraat.” 12mo. in
ninety-six pages, in the Bodleian (v. 58, Douce Collection).

90, 91. A quarto edition, consisting of fifty-five plates, published by
Ramberg at Hanover. In the Museum (press-mark, 554 _b_ 40). At Rotterdam
in the same year an edition in Dutch appeared, which contained several
adventures differing from the common version.

92. 1830. Baron von Halberg in this year published a versified edition
in octavo at Crefeld. In the Museum, with the press-mark 11526 _d_.

93–96. “Der ganz neue wiedererstandene Till Eulenspiegel,” in 100
chapters, with 102 woodcuts. “München, 1833, 1836–7, 1844.” This edition
has been used in the preparation of this volume.

97, 98. “Avantures de Tiel Ulespiegle et ses bon mots, finesses et
amusantes inventions. Par Joseph Octave Delepierre. Bruges. 1835.”
Ninety pages in octavo. Only fifty copies of this edition printed.—1840.
“Les Aventures de Tiel Ulespiegle. Par Delepierre.” An octavo of 222
pages. This edition of M. Delepierre affirms with amusing mock gravity
the entirely Flemish origin of Owlglass, and the names are ingeniously
altered to suit Flemish localities. Use has been made of the edition in
this version.

99, 100, 101. In the years 1838 and 1839, several editions appeared, one
of them that of Cornelius, which, together with the 1519 edition and the
preceding, has been consulted in this edition.

102. 1841. An edition belonging to Dr. Simrock’s Collection of German
Folkbooks, at Berlin.

103. “Tyll Eulenspiegel’s wunderbare und seltsame Historien. Von Carl
Frölich. Reutlingen, 1849.”

104. 1854. Dr. Thomas Murner’s Ulenspiegel. By Dr. J. M. Lappenberg.
Leipzig, Weigel. This is the best and completest edition yet published
of Owlglass, and one which has formed the groundwork of the translation
now published.

Several editions have appeared since, but none of them possessing value
sufficient to render notice necessary; the only one which need be
mentioned being—

105. “Histoire Joyeuse et Récréative de Tiel L’Espiègle. Nouvelle
Edition. Avec une étude littéraire sur Tiel L’Espiègle par Pr. van
Duyse. Gand, 1858.”

We have thus, without referring to the numerous badly printed versions
of the illustrious Eulenspiegel, given here a complete review of all the
editions of this remarkable book, which, from its length, will serve to
show how popular it has been from its very first appearance.

In connection with Eulenspiegel literature, it may be interesting in
this place to give a description of a curious work, of which three
copies are preserved in the Bodleian Library at Oxford (Douce
Collection, Catalogue, page 290 A. Press-marks, R 328, 90), and which,
by the kind permission of Dr. Bandinel, and of my friend, the Rev. A.
Hackman, M.A., Precentor of Christ Church, I have been permitted to
examine. It is entitled—

“The | French | Rogue. | Being a pleasant | History | of | His Life and
Fortunes | adorned with variety of other | Adventures | of no less
Rarity | With | Epigrams | suitable to each Stratagem | London: |
Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes, | and are to be sold at his Shop,
over against | Exeter House in the Strand, 1672.”

The two copies which I saw are well preserved, especially the one marked
“R 90,” which is bound up with the letters of Monsieur De Bergerac. The
book is a small 12mo, with 197 pages and two pages of advertisements.
The Signature A is formed of title page and six sides (without
pagination) of preface and lines to the author. It is one of those dull
books so common about that time, and contains the adventures and travels
of a personage who, like Owlglass, but without his wit, cheats and robs
those whom he encounters. He journeys over France, and becomes a member
of a society of thieves, and swears to abide by certain rules of their
order, tedious to be recapitulated here. The book is curious as an
example of the taste of the time. The chapters are twenty-nine in
number, and, as the title page says, epigrams appropriate to the
adventures are inserted. Other works, ancient and modern, akin to
Eulenspiegel literature, will be found in a subsequent Appendix.

-----

Footnote 14:

  Adventure the 24th, pp. 38–39.

Footnote 15:

  This should be M.CCC. & L.

Footnote 16:

  Error _oeuues_ for _oeuures_.




                              APPENDIX B.

           _The historical Eulenspiegel and his gravestone._


It is scarcely necessary to enter upon the question of the historical
Eulenspiegel. That there was such a person seems unquestionable. The
names of his parents were Saxon names, not unfrequent, and the name of
Ulenspiegel appears as early as 1337, being the name of a widow living
at Brunswick, and again in 1473, in conjunction with another name. The
widow Ulenspeygel has even been supposed to be the mother of our hero.
But what little is known of him, is more easily to be read in the book
itself than gathered from other records.

Among the objects of interest which remain to the present time, a
testimony of the real existence of Eulenspiegel, is the gravestone at
Möllen, the place assigned to him as his last resting-place, both by
historical tradition and in the folk-book. Caspar Abel, who in 1729–32
published a collection of old German chronicles, gives one which he
describes as having been the property of the family of Hetling, at
Halberstadt, and which seems to have been written about 1486. In this
chronicle, mention is made under the year 1350 of the ravages of the
Black Death at Braunschweig, and it continues: “Thereof died Ulenspeygel
at Möllen, among the Gheyseler brethren” (“_Dosulffest sterff
Ulenspeygel to Möllen unde de Gheyseler Broder kemen an_”). Yet it is
necessary to remark, that this statement, later than the first presumed
edition of 1486—of which little is known—is not supported by any other
Saxon chronicle of the fifteenth century. The next reference to the
grave at Möllen, is in Reimar Rock’s _Lübscher Chronik_, in the
following jest concerning the Cardinal Raymond; being the original hint,
indeed, which I have amplified in the present book, in adventure the
hundredth and tenth: “The Cardinal abode in the first night at Möllen.
And when he comprehended the German speech, and heard of the holy-living
saint Ulenspegel, an if there had been money in store—after which do all
Italians and Spaniards thirst—Ulenspegel could have been entered on the
Pope his calendar.” This jest, as Dr. Lappenberg well notices, is at any
rate a proof, that at this time the grave was often sought out by
visitors. Michael Heberer, in his voyage to Sweden and Denmark, in 1592,
describes the gravestone, but not in the way depicted in our cut. He
makes no mention of the figure, but only of the owl and glass; and the
same description occurs in Merian (_Topographie von Nieder Sachsen_) as
being there in 1614. But in 1631, in the manuscript Chronicles of
Dethlev Dreyer, a description of the stone, nearly as it now stands, is
given; but a basket of owls is mentioned, so it could scarcely be the
same. Dreyer and Zeiller (_Reiszbuch durch Hoch und Nieder Teutschland_,
1674), both speak of the gravestone having been renewed and fenced off
from the attacks of boys, and other wilful destroyers of antiquities.
But the most interesting account is given by Zacharias Conrad von
Uffenbach, who visited Möllen in the year 1710, and I shall, therefore,
offer a translation of it:—

“We first,” says the writer, “examined at the church, which stands upon
a slight hill, just by where one goeth up by steps into the churchyard,
near the door, the little hut in which the gravestone of Eulenspiegel is
set up and leans against the wall of the church. Formerly it had lain in
the churchyard not far from the church, under the elm tree, which still
stands in its place, but as by bad boys it was often damaged and went
hard to be destroyed by rain and weather, a most worthy and benevolent
magistrate of this town, a long time ago, had it placed against the wall
of the church, and a small house erected round about it, and closed in,
with only an open window, or hole, in front. The stone is more than four
ells high, and only about one broad. There is not alone an owl and glass
sculptured on the two sides, as Merian or Zeiller says in _Topog. Sax.
infer._ p. 184, but the noble [_vornehmes_] likeness of Eulenspiegel is
upon it in the size of life, although not quite equal to his stature and
tallness, and the above-named things are in his hands. That he wears
bells, may not arise from the fact that he plays the part of a wise fool
or a jesting knave [_Schalksknecht_], but that in those times the bells
were greatly in the fashion, and even worn by great lords (as see in
_Observat. Hallens. ad rem liter. spectant. Germanicas_ concerning
Schellen-Moritz). The inscription on the lower part of the stone, is
somewhat damaged by rain and carelessness; so that it is somewhat
difficult to be read by those who know it not. In the wood of the hut
very many Owlglasses [_Eulenspiegels_, used in the sense of rogues] have
cut their names.”

The expression, that the figure was the size of life, but not quite
equal to the stature and tallness of Eulenspiegel, cannot be otherwise
understood than that the figure was not entirely cut in the stone, but
perhaps only to the knee. It would seem, however, that the figure was
repeatedly replaced, for the one now existing differs from the account
given by Uffenbach. It stands upright at the wall of the tower, with a
wooden shed round it, the lower part of which hides the inscription.
Other relics of this apostle of knavery are mentioned by Uffenbach, such
as an old shirt of mail, preserved in the council chamber at Möllen. His
sword, beaker, and money-pouch, all of a later period, are also shown.
With the beaker, a very narrow and deep one, a sorry joke is connected,
that he had it so made because his mother bade him never to dip his nose
too deep in a glass.

In respect of the gravestone, it is yet to be mentioned, that in a
little descriptive work which appeared some years ago, the figure is
attributed to a certain knight, Tilodictus Ulenspegel, who, in
Westphalian annals of the fourteenth century, is not unknown. Yet for
the sake of romance, and also from historical probability, it is best to
adhere to the story which remains to us. The inscription on the stone is
as follows:—

                          “Anno 1350 is dŭss
                          -en vp gehauē ty-
                          le vlenspegel ligt
                          her vnder begrauen
                          marcket wol vnd
                          dencket dran. wat
                          ick gwest sivp .. e
                          ... de her vor ...
                          ... an moten mi
                          glick wer.....”

“Anno 1350 is this sculptured, Tyle Ulenspegel lies here under buried.
Mark well and think thereover what I have been....” (rest too
fragmentary). But to be restored thus:

                        “Gedenk daran
                        Wat ick gwest sivp ... e
                        ... de her vor (uber)
                        (Gh) an moten mi
                        glich wer (den).”

“Think thereover, what I have been ... who passeth by may to me become
alike.”

At Damme, in Belgium, there is another gravestone with which tradition
connects our hero, but unsatisfactorily. A writer in Meyer’s
“Conversations Lexicon,” vol. ix. p. 331, thinks this gravestone is that
of Eulenspiegel’s father, who might have died at the date of it, 1301.




                              APPENDIX C.

          _Of Dr. Thomas Murner, the author of Eulenspiegel._


As the author of Eulenspiegel, and also as a not unknown man in his own
country, as well as in England, it may be not unwelcome to print here a
few brief notes concerning Thomas Murner. He was born at Ehenheim, south
of Strasburg, the 24th December, 1475, his father being a cobbler at
that place. He was educated in a school of the Franciscans at Strasburg,
and seems afterwards to have visited, in the capacity of travelling
student, the Universities of Paris, Freiburg, Rostock, Prague, Vienna,
and Cracow, and in his nineteenth year (1494) appears already to have
taken orders. In 1499 he published his first work, his _Invectiva contra
Astrologos_, and another piece, the _Tractatus perutilis de phitonico
contractu_, and thenceforward lived a life of extreme literary activity.
Having similar tastes to Sebastian Brandt, author of the “Ship of
Fools,” we find Murner printing similar works—works of a satirical kind,
such as the _Narrenbeschwerung_ (“Conjuration of Fools”), the
_Schelmenzunft_ (“Knave Corporation”), and the _Gäuchmatt_, in which the
various classes of society are bitterly treated, but in a way not
interesting to modern persons. The most memorable thing which can
connect Murner with England, is the part he took in the dispute between
Henry the Eighth and Luther; and a book which he published under the
title of “Is the King of England a liar or is Luther?” (_Ob der Kunig
usz Engelland ein lügner sey oder der Luther?_), obtained favour for him
from Henry.

The following letter from Sir Thomas More to Cardinal Wolsey, dated the
26th August, 1523, will tell the story of Murner’s visit to this country
better than any other mode of narrating it. Cardinal Wolsey was then
staying at Easthampstead. The spelling, which is quite intelligible
enough, has been left in its original state, to give the reader an idea
of the unsettled condition of English at that time.

“It may ferther lyke Your Good Grace to be advertised that one Thomas
Murner, a Frere of Saynt Francisce, which wrote a booke against Luther
in defence of the Kinges boke, was out of Almaigne sent into England, by
the meane of a simple[17] person, an Almaign namyng hymselfe servaunt un
to the Kinges Grace, and afferming un to Murner, that the King had gevyn
hym in charge to desyre Murner to cum over to hym in to England, and by
occasion ther of he is cummen over and has now bene here a good while.
Wher fore the Kinges Grace, pitiyng that he was so deceived, and having
tendre respecte to the goode zele that he bereth toward the feith, and
his good hart and mynd toward His Highnes, requyreth Your Grace that it
may lyke you to cause hym have in reward one hundred pownde, and that he
may retourn home, wher his presence is very necessary; for he is one of
the chiefe stays agaynst the faction of Luther in that parties, agaynst
whom he hath wrytten many bokis in the Almayng tong; and now, sith the
cumming hither, he hath translated into Latyn, the boke that he byfore
made in Almaign, in defence of the Kinges boke. He is Doctour of
Divinite and of bothe Lawes, and a man for wryting and preching of great
estimation in his cuntre.

“Hit may like Your Grace ferther to wite, that the same simple person,
which caused Murner to cum in to England, is now cummen to the Court,
and hath brought with him a Barons son of Almaygn, to whom he hath also
persuaded, that the Kinges Grace wold be glad to have hym in his
service. He hath also brought lettres from Duke Ferdinand un to the
Kinge’s Grace, which lettres J send un to Your Grace, wherin he desireth
the Kinge’s Highnes to take in to his service, and to reteyne, with some
convenient yerely pention Ducem Mechelburgensem; of which request the
Kinges Grace greatly merveileth, and veryly thinketh that this simple
felow, which brought the lettres, lykewise as he caused Murner to cum
hither, and persuaded the Barons sone that the King would be glad to
have his service, so hath by some simple ways brought the Duke of
Mechelborough in the mynd, that the Kings Grace wold, at the
contemplation of Duke Ferdinandis lettres, be content to reteign the
Duke of Mechelborough with a yerly pention. The felow hath brought also
fro the Duke of Mechelborough lettres of credence written in the Duche
tong. He bare hym selfe in Almaign for the Kinge’s servaunt, and bosted
that he had a yerely pention of fiftie markes, and that the King had
sent him thither to take upp servauntes for hym; and now he saith, he is
servaunt un to the Empereurs Majeste, and is going into Spaigne, with
lettres to hym; and in dede he hath diverse lettres to his Magestie, and
so it was easie for hym to gete, if he entend to deceive and mocke; as
the Kinges Grace thinketh that he doth. For His Grace never saw hym
byfore, but he understandeth now, that before this tyme he was in
England, when th Empereur was here,[18] and slew a man and escaped his
way. Wherfor His Grace requyreth Yours to give hym your prudent advice,
as well in a convenient answere to be made both to Duke Ferdinand and
the Duke of Mechelborough, as also in what wyse hit shal be convenient
to ordre this simple felowe, that so hath deceived menne in the Kinges
name.”

However agreeable to the vanity, and useful to the cause, of the King,
the book is a somewhat dreary book to read now; and save that it
consists of a long dialogue between the King, Luther, and Murner, there
need be little more said of it. Those who wish to read it will find it
in its original German in that valuable collection of Middle Age
literature made by Scheible, and entitled _Das Kloster_ (the Convent)
Volume IV. pp. 893–982. The dispute continued to give a tone to his life
henceforth, and all his later years were spent in empty and angry
controversy. Indeed, we lose sight of him altogether in the year 1530;
and it has been suspected that he was murdered at Lucerne, though we
hear the last of him at Strasburg. His death was certainly before 1537.

-----

Footnote 17:

  “Simple” is here used in the sense of “cunning,” “bad.”

Footnote 18:

  Charles V. was in England from the 26th of May, when he landed at
  Dover, till the 1st of July, 1522.




                              APPENDIX D.

  _The verses inserted by William Copland in the English black-letter
                          Howleglas of 1528._


  _How Howleglas came to a scoler to make verses with hym to that vse
    of reason. And howe that Howleglas began, as after shal folowe_:—

                              HOWLEGLAS.

          Mars with septer[19] a king coronate,
          Furius[20] in affliction, and taketh no regarde.
          By terrible fightyng he is our prymate
          And god of battell, and person ryght forward,
          Of warries[21] the tutor, the locke and the warde.
          His power, his might, who can them resyst?
          Not all this worlde, if that him selfe lyst.

                              THE SCHOLER.

          Not all this worlde, who told the[22] so?
          Where is that written, ryght fayne wold I see?
          Ye came lyke a foole and so shall ye go.
          By one person only deceived ye may be
          And by astronomy, I tell vnto the.
          If that will not helpe, some shyft shal I fynde
          By craft or cunnyng, Mars for to blynde.

                              HOWLEGLAS.

          Venus a god of loue most decorate,
          The floure of women and lady most pvre,
          Louers to concorde she doth aye aggregate
          With parfyte loue, as marble to dure,
          The knot of loue, she knittes on them sure
          With frendly amite[23] and neuer to discorde
          By dedes, thought, cogitation, nor worde.

                              THE SCHOLER.

          Not to discorde? yed[24] did I never see,
          Knowe not here tell of louers suche twayne,
          But some fault there was, learne this of me.
          Other in thought, or yet in wordes playne
          Your reasons be nought, your tongue goeth in vayne.
          By naturall person such loue is not found
          In Fraunce, Flaunders, nor yet in Englysh ground.

                              HOWLEGLAS.

          The God of wyne, that Bachus hath to name,
          The sender of fruytes, that maketh wynes all,
          May slake or make or put them in frame,
          All at his pleasure and use dynyall.[25]
          He may the[26] exalt in lyke wyse to fall,
          Their lorde and meister,[27] and chief gouernour
          He may then destroye and make in an houre.

                              THE SCHOLER.

          All to destroye it is not by his myght,
          Nor yet for to make, of that be thou sure.
          “Omnia per ipsum,” Saint Johan sayes full ryght.
          Than we call Christ our god and our treasure.
          Presume not so hye,[28] you fayle of your measure,
          Rede, heare and see, and here well a waye,
          Unknowen, vnsayde and for grace thou pray.

-----

Footnote 19:

  _Septer_, sceptre.

Footnote 20:

  _furius_, furious.

Footnote 21:

  _warries_, wars.

Footnote 22:

  _the_, thee.

Footnote 23:

  _amite_, French _amitié_.

Footnote 24:

  _yed_, yet.

Footnote 25:

  _dynyall_, denial.

Footnote 26:

  _the_, thee.

Footnote 27:

  _meister_, master.

Footnote 28:

  _hye_, high.




                              APPENDIX E.

       _The Bakâla legend of the Valacqs analogous to Owlglass._


The most interesting fiction with which I have met, approaching in
intention and construction to the German Eulenspiegel, is a legend
current among the Wallachians, entitled “Bakâla.” The hero goes through
a few adventures savouring much of the wily malice of Owlglass; but
there are only thirteen of these adventures in all. The first introduces
us to Bakâla, at the death of his father, who leaves a single cow behind
him. The question arises between Bakâla and his two elder brothers, as
to which is to become possessor of the cow. They agree at last to build
three sheds, and, placing the cow in the middle, give her the
opportunity of deciding the ownership. Bakâla builds his shed of a
grassy material, which the cow perceives, and instead of entering the
sheds of stone built by Bakâla’s brethren, enters his, and thus becomes
his property. He then sells his cow to a tree, which agitated by the
wind, appears to bargain with him. His brethren mock at him for a fool
in selling the cow to a tree; and next day, when payment is to be made,
the cow has broken loose and departed, and when Bakâla asks for the
money, there being no wind, the tree is silent. Then Bakâla cuts down
the tree and finds a pot of money in the roots; thereof he takes the
agreed price, and goes home, and his brethren are astonished at his
receiving money from a tree. The two brothers plague him until he tells
them the whole story as to the treasure, which they go and take. Bakâla
is then sent to borrow a fruit measure from a neighbour, who asks him
what he wants it for, and Bakâla tells him that it is to measure his
money. So the neighbour follows him, and peeps through the window. This
is seen by the inmates of the house, and Bakâla is told to go and kill
him, which he does; the brothers only meaning that Bakâla should give
him a beating. When they find, however, that Bakâla has killed him, they
are obliged to depart from that place.

An adventure by which Bakâla becomes possessed of a sack of incense,
obtains him a gift from the Almighty (who, as in the ancient
miracle-plays, is brought into the story) of a marvellous bagpipe, which
causes every one to dance. When a shepherd the sheep dance; and his
master, who is watching him, is obliged to dance also; and afterwards
his master’s wife dances herself to death. Other mischief Bakâla also
contrives to do. After cutting the tails of his master’s dogs off, and
killing the youngest child by washing it and hanging it up to dry, the
master resolves to depart; for he is bound by a treaty to Bakâla. But
Bakâla gets into the sack, which the master prepares to carry books in,
and is discovered at last. Then the master and his son conspire to drown
Bakâla; but he overhears them, and the son gets drowned instead. Bakâla
appears here to be analogous to the Old Man of the Sea, of whom Sindbad
cannot rid himself. At last the contract between them, to the effect
that either on breaking it should forfeit a long strip of skin in the
back, has to be completed by Bakâla on the body of his master, who has
broken it by the attempt to drown his servant. And as the master’s back
is sore, he takes the book-wallet and departs. This story, as our
authority, Schott, says (_Walachische Mährchen_, p. 362), reminds us of
the agreement between Apollo and Marsyas. Then he sets a bride free from
a disagreeable bridegroom by a stratagem, and after acting the bride’s
part himself, escapes.

The last story in the series is worthy of translation entire, therefore
here it is:—

    “_How Bakâla findeth a fellow, and thereafter is not any other
    news heard of him._—After that Bakâla had in such wise departed
    from the bridegroom, he gat, whence I know not, a sack filled with
    sawdust. No longtime had he journeyed, when he encountered by the
    way another man, who likewise bare a sack. Then did they greet
    each other, and after awhile proposed that they should change
    sacks. And so did they; then they hasted to open the sacks, and in
    that which Bakâla had received lay nought but flint stones, and
    what the other received that do we know. For a time they looked
    upon their prizes with great wonder; but thereupon laughed hugely.
    ‘Truly,’ quoth Bakâla, ‘we have beguiled each other!’ ‘That is
    truth indeed!’ cried the other. And great content had these twain
    one of the other, and embraced thereupon, and made agreement that
    thereafter would they journey everywhere in company. From that
    time hath no more been heard of Bakâla.”

Schott, in his work, finds analogy between the various adventures of
Bakâla, and the course of the sun through the months of the year; but it
is foreign to our present purpose to enter upon such a speculation. Yet,
as a curious exemplification of the love of trickery to be found among
all races, this Wallachian Owlglass is worthy of mention.




                              APPENDIX F.

              _Works akin to the Eulenspiegel literature._


Although the Eulenspiegel folk-book has become the best known of the
special class of books in which the middle age took such pleasure, there
are many other compositions of a kindred nature worthy of mention, and
of these I shall here describe the most important. The first on which
any remark is necessary is the celebrated legend of Salomon and
Marcolphus, which, in Latin, German, Anglo-Saxon, and French, has
survived to the present time. Marcolphus is a jester in a more sober
sense than is Owlglass; the jests of the former, though some of them are
analogous to those of the latter, rarely touch upon the humourous. They
are capable of application to far more serious things, to matters of
speculative philosophy and science. Luther, for instance, applied a
story of Marcolphus in reproof of persons who shut their eyes to the
good, but afterwards were compelled, whether they would or no, to behold
the evil.[29] But the Marcolphus legend is an exemplification rather of
the combats of wit and wisdom common to the earlier part of the middle
age, than a vivid reflex, as is the Owlglass, of the manners and customs
of the time to which it belongs. One story borrowed from the Marcolphus,
or from Morlini, at an early period, appears in Owlglass, being the
second adventure in this edition, p. 3.

The _Narrenschiff_ (“Ship of Fools”) of Sebastian Brandt was published
in 1494. It is also called the _Welt Spiegel_, or “World Mirror,” and it
enjoyed a great and deserved reputation in its time, but was far too
pedantic and tiresome to survive to the present age, or be profitable
now. A few remarks upon it, extracted from Hallam, will be found in the
Preface.

Murner himself published a satirical work in 1517, entitled the
_Schelmenzunft_ (“Corporation of Knaves”), but from a want of entirety
it has fallen into little repute. So also the _Gäuchmatt_ has been
forgotten, while Owlglass, published in the same year (1519), will live
a companion to many.

Similar books had preceded Master Owlglass, but not with the same
success, although from them the frequent editors of the latter
abstracted stories to add to the deeds of the wandering knave; from the
legend of the “Priest Amis,” for instance, Murner took the story of the
invisible picture, the reading ass, the wise university examination at
Prague, and the history of the pardoner with the holy head of Saint
Brandonus. Another work, the “Priest of Kalenberg,” preceded Owlglass,
having appeared before the year 1494 at Vienna, being written by Villip
Frankfurter; the only copy known is preserved in the Hamburg Town
Library. The “Priest of Kalenberg” is mentioned by Sebastian Brandt in
the “Ship of Fools;” and Murner, in his _Narrenbeschwerung_, tells a
story concerning him. The book is alluded to by Fischart in the preface
to his Eulenspiegel, as having been a great success. The latest edition
of the “Priest of Kalenberg” appeared under the title of _Der geistliche
Eulenspiegel, oder der Pfarrer vom Kalenberg, nebst Schwänken einiger
anderen lustigen Gesellen_ (“The Clerical Eulenspiegel, or the Parson of
Kalenberg, with the quips of some other merry fellows”). Leipzig, 1818.

Another book which supplied the editors of Eulenspiegel with materials
for its extension was the Jests of Gonella, Court Fool to the Margrave
Nicolaus of Este (†1441), and to his son Borso, the Duke of Ferrara
(†1471); indeed, it is far from unlikely that Murner himself was
acquainted with it, as it was published in 1506 at Bologna. So rare is
this work, that in an appendix Dr. Lappenberg has reprinted it.

The “Jests of Poggio Bracciolini” (1381–1459), a man to whom we owe the
recovery of Quintilian, eight orations of Cicero, twelve comedies of
Plautus, and other classics, also furnished Murner with matter for the
Eulenspiegel. In fact, Murner and his successors must have very
diligently sought out all the literature of the class likely to serve
their purpose in adding to the adventures of their own hero. Thus
several stories are adapted from the “Cento Novelle Antiche” (printed at
Bologna, 1525), from Morlini (Naples, 1520), from Bebel, and from
François Villon.

There are a few books later than Eulenspiegel having a family
resemblance to it; of these the _Schimpf und Ernst_ (“Abuse and
Seriousness”) of John Pauli Pfedersheimer, published in 1522, is the
most noted. The following is the title of the first edition: “Schimpf
vn̄ | Ernst | heiset | das Buch mit namē | durchlaufft e d’ welthandlung
mit | ernstlichen vnd kurtzweiligen exem- | plen, parabolen vnd
hystorien | nützlich vnd gut zu besse- | rung der menschen.” This title
is in an oblong tablet surrounded with woodcuts. Below is Herodias
bringing the head of John the Baptist to her father; to the right is
Adam and Eve; to the left, Bishop Martin; and at the top is St. George
with the dragon. Sheets run from A-X iiii, 124 pages in folio, double
columns. Colophon: “Getruckt zu Strassburg von Johannes | Grieninger,
vnd volendet vff vnser lieben frawentag der geburt, | in dem iar nach
der geburt Christi vnsers herren. Tausend | fünf hundert vnd zwei vnd
zwantzig.” Then follows sheet Y, with six pages of contents. Copies in
the Royal Libraries at Dresden, Berlin, and München. Forty-nine editions
are specified by Lappenberg in “Ulenspiegel” (pp. 368–378), besides
several translations. Pauli, in turn, has borrowed from Eulenspiegel,
and that he understood the spirit of the book is plain from a reference
he makes to it.

Another work akin to the Owlglass is the popular folk-book of Friar
Rush, which is sufficiently well known to need no further description
here. Mr. Thoms has reprinted it in his “Collection of Early Prose
Romances.” Claus Narr von Ranstedt is another successor to Eulenspiegel.
This worthy was court-fool to the Elector of Saxony from 1486 to 1532;
thus a contemporary to Murner, who, indeed, mentions him in the
treatise, “Whether the King of England be a liar or Dr. Luther?” The
earliest edition appears to be of 1572, and its author was Master
Wolfgang Büttner, Priest of Volfferstet. In the preface, Büttner sneers
at Eulenspiegel, and asks why the pure words and good sayings of this
good man should not be preferred and esteemed rather than the shameless
stories of Owlglass.

Noteworthy also is a book containing the adventures of Hans Clauert of
Trebbin, who in a humble manner, yet not without humour, follows in the
footsteps of Owlglass. The only edition of it which I have seen is an
undated folk-book, published in the series of Otto Wigand at Leipzig.
This hero goes to Hungary and other places; but his adventures contain
none of the satiric intention evident in the Owlglass. With these
elucidatory remarks touching Owlglass, and the literature of which his
adventures form the completest example, I bid the reader

                           A HEARTY FAREWELL.

-----

Footnote 29:

  The curious reader will find this duly set forth in Mr. Kemble’s
  critical history of the Salomon and Marcolphus tale (Salomon and
  Saturnus, p. 70). And in the preface to Dr. Luther’s “Table Talk,”
  where this application is made, Stangwald complains of the great
  number of people who prefer Marcolphus, Eulenspiegel, and such books,
  to these _Colloquia Lutheri_.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed “Then said then” to “Then said the” on p. 138.
 2. All book titles and colophons are rendered as printed.
 3. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 4. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 6. Superscripts are denoted by a carat before a single superscript
      character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in
      curly braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Marvellous Adventures and Rare
Conceits of Master Tyll Owlglass, by Kenneth R. H.  Mackenzie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARVELLOUS ADVENTURES ***

***** This file should be named 55035-0.txt or 55035-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/0/3/55035/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

